Human Research Program 
Human Health Countermeasures Element 
 
 
 
Evidence Report 
Risk of Spaceflight-Induced Intracranial Hypertension and Vision 
Alterations 
 
 
Approved for Public Release: July 12, 2012  
 
 
 
Version 1.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center 
Houston, Texas 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
AUTHORS: 
 
David J. Alexander, MD1 
C. Robert Gibson, OD2 
Douglas R. Hamilton MD, PhD1 
Stuart M. C. Lee, MS1 
Thomas H. Mader, MD3 
Christian Otto, MD4 
Cherie M. Oubre, PhD1 
Anastas F. Pass, OD, MS, JD5 
Steven H. Platts, PhD6 
Jessica M. Scott, PhD4 
Scott M. Smith, PhD6 
Michael B. Stenger, PhD1 
Christian M. Westby, PhD4 
Susana B. Zanello, PhD4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1Wyle Science, Technology & Engineering Group 
Houston, TX, USA 
 
2Coastal Eye Associates 
Webster, TX, USA 
 
3Alaska Native Medical Center 
Anchorage, Alaska, USA 
 
4Universities Space Research Association 
Houston, TX, USA 
 
5University of Houston 
Houston, TX, USA 
 
6NASA Johnson Space Center 
Houston, TX, USA
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
i 
 
Table of Contents 
 
I. 
PRD RISK TITLE: RISK OF SPACEFLIGHT-INDUCED INTRACRANIAL 
HYPERTENSION/VISION ALTERATIONS ........................................................................ 1 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................... 1 
III. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... 2 
IV. SPACEFLIGHT EVIDENCE.................................................................................................. 7 
A. Summary of Existing Long-Duration Flight Data ................................................................... 7 
B. Summary of Human System Spaceflight Physiology............................................................ 19 
1. 
Ocular Evidence ................................................................................................................. 19 
2. 
Spaceflight-Induced Cardiovascular Adaptations .............................................................. 48 
3. 
Spaceflight-Induced Central Nervous System Adaptations ............................................... 66 
V. CONTRIBUTING FACTORS .............................................................................................. 78 
A. Potential In-flight Factors ...................................................................................................... 78 
1. 
Alterations in Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Metabolism ............................................................ 78 
2. 
Alterations in Sodium ........................................................................................................ 82 
3. 
Exercise .............................................................................................................................. 82 
B. Genetic Factors/Markers ........................................................................................................ 84 
1. 
One-Carbon Metabolism (Homocysteine) ......................................................................... 84 
2. 
Biomarkers ......................................................................................................................... 84 
VI. CASE DEFINITION/CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES ............................................ 85 
VII. GAPS ..................................................................................................................................... 86 
VIII. 
CONCLUSIONS ............................................................................................................ 87 
IX. REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................... 88 
X. APPENDICES ..................................................................................................................... 103 
Appendix A: Previous and Expanded In-flight Medical Requirements Testing for Crewmembers 
(MEDB 1.10) ....................................................................................................................... 103 
Appendix B: Additional Central Nervous System Work/Topic Areas that will be Incorporated 
into the Evidence Base ........................................................................................................ 104 
Appendix C: Acronyms .............................................................................................................. 105 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
 
1 
 
I. 
PRD RISK TITLE: Risk of Spaceflight-Induced Intracranial 
Hypertension/Vision Alterations 
Given that all astronauts are exposed to microgravity and cephalad-fluid shift, and given that 
both symptomatic and asymptomatic astronauts have exhibited optic nerve sheath edema on 
magnetic resonance imaging, there is a high probability that all astronauts have idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension to some degree, and that those susceptible (via eye architecture, 
anatomy, narrow disc) have a high likelihood of developing either choroidal folds or optic-disc 
edema, and that the degree of that edema will determine long-term or permanent vision loss, 
sequelae, or impairment. 
 
II. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Over the last 40 years there have been reports of visual acuity impairments associated with 
spaceflight through testing and anecdotal reports. Until recently, these changes were thought to 
be transient, but a comparison of pre and postflight ocular measures have identified a potential 
risk of permanent visual changes as a result of microgravity exposure. There are limited pre and 
postflight measures to define the risk and even less in-flight data is available. These data show 
that there is a subset of crewmembers that experience visual performance decrements, cotton-
wool spot formation, choroidal fold development, optic-disc edema, optic nerve sheath 
distention, and/or posterior globe flattening with varying degrees of severity and permanence. 
These changes define the visual impairment/intracranial pressure (VIIP) syndrome. It is thought 
that the ocular structural and optic nerve changes are caused by events precipitated by the 
cephalad-fluid shift crewmembers experience during long-duration spaceflight. It is believed that 
some crewmembers are more susceptible to these changes due to genetic/anatomical 
predisposition or lifestyle (fitness) related factors. Three important systems – ocular, 
cardiovascular, and central nervous – will be evaluated to understand the risk of developing the 
VIIP syndrome. Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the identified visual acuity 
and structural changes including increased intracranial pressure, localized ocular changes such as 
ocular hypotony, decreased venous compliance, and alterations in cerebrospinal fluid dynamics. 
As there are little data to determine the extent or cause of the VIIP syndrome, there is a 
knowledge gap related to etiology of the changes and the postflight resolution. This lack of 
knowledge gives the basis for increased pre, in-, and postflight monitoring to characterize the 
risk. It will be very important to determine the risk of developing the VIIP syndrome and if there 
is an increase in severity corresponding to mission duration for exploration class missions.  
Although the leading hypothesis is that increased intracranial pressure underlies the observed 
changes in affected crewmembers, due to the paucity of intracranial pressure measurements in 
these crewmembers the term optic-disc edema will be used in this report, rather than the term 
papilledema.   
 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
 
2 
 
III. 
INTRODUCTION 
To date, fifteen long-duration crewmembers have experienced in-flight and postflight visual and 
anatomical changes including optic-disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic 
shifts as well as documented postflight elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). In the postflight time 
period, some individuals have experienced transient changes while others have experienced 
changes that are persisting with varying degrees of severity. While the underlying etiology of 
these changes is unknown at this time, the NASA medical community suspects that the 
microgravity-induced cephalad-fluid shift and commensurate changes in physiology play a 
significant role. The Human Health and Performance Directorate (formerly the Space Life 
Sciences Directorate [SLSD]) has assembled a VIIP project team to address this issue using a 
comprehensive project plan with regard to operations and research.  
 
NASA has determined that the first documented case of a U.S. astronaut affected by the VIIP 
syndrome occurred in an astronaut during a long-duration International Space Station (ISS) 
mission. The astronaut noticed a marked decrease in near-visual acuity throughout the mission. 
This individual‟s postflight fundoscopic examination and fluorescence angiography revealed 
choroidal folds inferior to the optic disc and a cotton-wool spot in the right eye, with no evidence 
of optic-disc edema in either eye. The left eye examination was normal. The acquired choroidal 
folds gradually improved but were still present 3 years postflight. Brain MRI, lumbar puncture, 
and OCT were not performed preflight or postflight on this astronaut. 
 
Additional cases of altered visual acuity have been reported since, and one case has included the 
report of a scotoma (visual field defect), which resulted in the astronaut having to tilt his head 
15 degrees to view instruments and procedures. These visual symptoms persisted for over 12 
months after flight. This type of functional deficit is not only of concern to the individual, but is 
of concern to the mission and the ISS program managers. 
 
An alteration in visual acuity associated with spaceflight is not a new finding. Reports 
documented through medical testing, research, and anecdotal reports have circulated over the 
last 40 years. Mader et al. [1] recently provided case studies of seven long-duration astronauts 
who underwent extensive postflight medical examinations in response to reports of changes in 
visual acuity. Though these clinical findings were important unto themselves, the retrospective 
analysis of questionnaires posed to 300 short and long-duration crewmembers furthered our 
understanding of the phenomenon with the indication that these spaceflight-induced vision 
changes are not unique. Changes in visual acuity are not uncommon in astronauts, although 
there appears to be a higher prevalence among long-duration crewmembers. Specifically, 29% 
of short-duration and 60% of long-duration crewmembers reported degradation of long distance 
or near-visual acuity, which in some long-duration cases did not resolve in the years after the 
mission. In the seven ISS astronaut case studies, preflight eye examinations were normal, but 
most reported diminished visual acuity in flight that persisted after the mission. There is a 
constellation of symptoms and physiologic changes referred to as the VIIP syndrome, and a 
great deal of individual astronaut variability, where some astronauts are asymptomatic while 
others exhibit structural changes and large changes in visual acuity. Unfortunately, there is a 
general lack of data to more definitively link the cause(s) of the vision changes. Mader et al.[1] 
propose that cephalad-fluid shifts associated with microgravity may be a primary contributor 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
 
3 
 
with downstream effects, with specific reference to the changes in the ocular structures, the 
optic nerve, and ICPs. 
 
As a result of the Mader et al. [1] findings, further examination of medical data on the affected 
long-duration ISS crewmembers was performed to better characterize the constellation of 
symptoms and anatomical and physiologic changes. After exposure to spaceflight of 5 to 6 
months duration, seven astronauts were discovered to have neuro-ophthalmic findings. The 
findings consist of disc edema in 5 astronauts, globe flattening in five astronauts, nerve fiber 
layer (NFL) thickening by OCT in six of the astronauts, complaints of a decrement in near 
vision in seven astronauts, choroidal folds in five astronauts, and cotton-wool spots in three 
astronauts. Five of the seven astronauts with complaints of altered near vision were 
documented to have a pre to post-mission hyperopic shift of equal to or greater than + 0.50 
diopters (D) spherical equivalent refraction in one or both eyes (range +0.50 D to +1.50 D). 
Five of these seven were noted to have globe flattening by MRI. Lumbar punctures performed 
in four astronauts with disc edema showed opening pressures of 22, 21, 28, and 28.5 cm H2O 
performed at 60, 19, 12 and 57 days post-mission, respectively. One astronaut has a sustained 
opening pressure of 22 cm H2O 1700 days after flight. Disc edema was graded with the 
Modified Frisén Scale. Table 1 provides key points of clinical information for each astronaut 
obtained preflight, during the ISS mission and postflight, in no particular order. Data is 
available and approved for release for seven cases at this time. The evidence report will be 
updated as additional data is collected, analyzed, and or released. Disc edema was graded with 
the Modified Frisén Scale.  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
4 
 
Table 1: Summary of VIIP Case Data Available at Time of Publication 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
5 
 
 
(OD=right, OS=left, OU=both eyes, sph=sphere, OCT=optical coherence tomography, MRI=magnetic resonance imaging, CSF=cerebral spinal 
fluid, NFL=retinal nerve fiber layer, R+=return to Earth; [presented by number of days, for example, R+19 is 19 days after return to Earth]) 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
6 
 
It is important to recognize that visual symptoms reported by astronauts in the past were often 
minor, transient, not accompanied by other symptoms or significant clinical findings, and are a 
common finding in the general population of 40 to 50-year-old individuals. Increased ICP was 
not suspected and no testing was performed to evaluate changes. Due to potential functional 
visual deficits from induced hyperopic shifts, persistent symptoms, and the acquisition of 
detailed anatomical images suggesting architectural alterations, NASA is taking a much more 
aggressive approach to addressing this problem through the VIIP project.  
 
A VIIP Summit was held in February 2011 to solicit input and recommendations from a diverse 
group of experts from the fields of medicine and research, and to function as the forum in which 
the scope of the problem was defined. A subset of these experts will serve on a Research and 
Clinical Advisory Panel (RCAP) to provide guidance for the future research project. A summary 
of the meeting and recommendations can be found in The Visual Impairment Intracranial 
Pressure Summit Report [2]. 
 
NASA‟s Space and Clinical Operations Division, in collaboration with the VIIP project, has 
implemented an expanded set of medically required preflight, in-flight, and postflight testing 
(Appendix A: MedB 1.10) to determine the existence and degree of the ophthalmic and ICP 
alterations. To facilitate the in-flight collection of data, the Space Medicine Division and the 
VIIP project have increased the on-orbit imaging capability by recently flying a video 
fundoscope and state-of-the-art hand-held tonometer, and developing procedures for eye 
ultrasound to characterize globe flattening and increases in optic nerve sheath diameter (ONSD). 
The Space Medicine Division and the VIIP project are also developing a study to evaluate a 
noninvasive ICP monitoring device for the clinical evaluation of ICP preflight, in flight, and 
postflight. This increased capability and expanded set of tests are used to inform the medical 
treatment of the individual astronauts as well as characterize the manifestation of the pathology 
to inform the astronaut corps and the spaceflight community in general. The results of these tests 
and images can function on an individual level to inform medical care and occupational health 
decisions. On a population level, these results can inform risk management decisions. 
Additionally, all of these data are used in conjunction with human research data acquired over 
the life of the space program to determine the potential scope of the forward research plan. 
 
Note: A wide variety of pressure types are mentioned throughout the document, including 
ICP/cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure, intraocular pressure (IOP), central venous 
pressure (CVP), capillary fluid pressure, interstitial pressure, mean arterial pressure, arterial 
pulse pressure, and partial pressure of CO2 (ppCO2). While different publications may report 
these pressures in either mm Hg or cm H2O, to maintain consistency of units in this report, this 
document will report ICP/CSF opening pressures in cm H2O (and in cases where a quoted 
reference used mm Hg the value in cm H2O will be given in parentheses). All other types of 
pressures mentioned previously (IOP, CVP, etc.) will be reported in mm Hg (and in cases where 
a quoted reference used cm H2O the value in mm Hg will be given in parentheses). 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
7 
 
IV. 
SPACEFLIGHT EVIDENCE 
A. 
Summary of Existing Long-Duration Flight Data 
The first U.S. case of visual changes observed on orbit was reported by a long-duration astronaut 
that noticed a marked decrease in near-visual acuity throughout his mission onboard the ISS, but 
at no time reported headaches, transient visual obscurations, pulsatile tinnitus, or diplopia. His 
postflight fundus examination (Figure 1) revealed choroidal folds inferior to the optic disc and a 
single cotton-wool spot in the inferior arcade of the right eye. The acquired choroidal folds 
gradually improved but were still present 3 years postflight. The left eye examination was 
normal. There was no documented evidence of optic-disc edema in either eye. Brain MRI, 
lumbar puncture, and OCT were not performed preflight or postflight on this astronaut. 
 
 
 
The second case of visual changes secondary to long-duration spaceflight onboard the ISS was 
reported approximately 3 months after launch when the astronaut noticed that he could now 
only see the Earth clearly while looking through his reading glasses. This change continued for 
the remainder of the mission without noticeable improvement or progression. He did not 
complain of transient visual obscurations, headaches, diplopia, pulsatile tinnitus, or visual 
changes during eye movement. In the months since landing he has noted a gradual but 
incomplete improvement in vision. 
 
Fluorescein angiography confirmed the choroidal folds (Figure 2). A magnetic resonance 
angiography (MRA) and magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) were normal. An OCT 
confirmed the increased retinal nerve fiber layer (NFL) thickening consistent with optic-disc 
edema nasally and demonstrated a normal macular retinal NFL thickness. A lumbar puncture, 2 
Figure 1: Fundus examination of first 
case of visual changes from long-duration 
spaceflight. Fundus examination revealed 
choroidal folds inferior to the optic disc 
and a single cotton-wool spot in the 
inferior arcade of the right eye (white 
arrows).  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
8 
 
months after return to Earth, documented a borderline opening pressure of 22 cm H2O (normal 
range 6.8-20.4 cm H2O) with normal CSF composition. The astronaut had additional postflight 
lumbar punctures with documented opening pressures of 26 and 22 cm H2O at 17 and 19 
months, respectively, with no improvement in visual acuity. 
 
 
 
The third case of visual changes secondary to spaceflight onboard the ISS presented 
asymptomatically with no changes in visual acuity during the mission and no complaints of 
headaches, transient visual obscurations, diplopia, or pulsatile tinnitus. Upon return to Earth, no 
eye issues were reported by the astronaut at landing. Fundus examination revealed bilateral, 
asymmetrical disc edema (OD: grade 3 on the Frisén scale; OS: grade 1) (Figure 3). There was 
no evidence of choroidal folds or cotton-wool spots. A small hemorrhage was observed inferior 
to the optic disc in the right eye. This astronaut had the most pronounced optic-disc edema of all 
the astronauts reported to date, but had no choroidal folds, globe flattening, or hyperopic shift. 
At 10 days post-landing an MRI of the brain and orbits was normal. However, there appeared to 
be a mild increase in CSF signal around the right optic nerve. A MRV showed no evidence for 
cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. An OCT showed marked NFL thickening (OD>OS) 
consistent with optic-disc edema (Figure 4). A lumbar puncture, 19 days after return to Earth, 
documented a mildly elevated opening pressure of 21 cm H2O (normal range 6.8-20.4 cm H2O) 
with normal CSF composition.  
 
Figure 2: Fundus examination of second 
case of visual changes from long-duration 
spaceflight. Fundoscopic images showing, 
choroidal folds (white arrows) in the 
papillomacular bundle area in the right 
eye and left eye and a cotton-wool spot 
(bottom arrow) at the inferior arcade in 
the left eye. Both optic discs show grade 1 
disc edema.  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
9 
 
 
 
Figure 4: OCT examination of third case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight. Postflight Zeiss Stratus 
OCT scans show significant NFL thickening (black line upper panel) consistent with the observed bilateral optic-
disc edema (OD>OS). Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer (RNFL) Thickness Profile – The black line indicates the thickness 
values of the patient‟s scan around the optic disc from temporal, superior, nasal, inferior to temporal (TSNIT). 
Colors indicate comparison versus normative database. Green: Within normal limits, with values inside the 95% 
normal range. Yellow: Borderline, with values outside 95% but within 99% confidence interval of the normal 
distribution (.01 < P < .05). Red: Outside normal limits, with values outside 99% confidence interval of the normal 
distribution. 
Figure 3: Fundus examination of third 
case of visual changes from long-duration 
spaceflight. Fundoscopic images of the 
right and left optic disc showing profound 
grade 3 edema at the right optic disc and 
grade 1 edema at the left optic disc. 
Adapted from Mader TH et al. [1] with 
permission from Elsevier, obtained via 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
10 
 
The fourth case of visual changes on orbit was significant for a past medical history of 
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for macroadenoma, but postoperative imaging showed no 
residual or recurrent disease. Approximately 2 months into the ISS mission the astronaut 
noticed a progressive decrease in near-visual acuity in his right eye and a scotoma in his right 
temporal field of vision. He described the scotoma to be fixed and translucent such that he could 
not read normal 12-point font through it and it was the „shape‟ of a football held upright at 
arm‟s length‟. The astronaut denied transient visual obscurations, headaches, diplopia, pulsatile 
tinnitus, or vision changes during eye movement and environmental parameters including 
carbon dioxide (CO2) were within the normal operating levels of the ISS for the duration of the 
mission (CO2 levels on the ISS are nominally between 2.3 to 5.3 mm Hg). During the mission 
the astronaut used a topical corticosteroid and oral ketoconazole for a facial rash, occasional 
vitamin D supplements, and promethazine to treat symptoms of space adaptation syndrome. He 
had never used tetracycline or nalidixic acid. He participated in two EVAs during the mission 
and was not exposed to any toxic fumes. 
 
Preflight eye examination of the fourth astronaut with the scotoma revealed a cycloplegic 
refraction of -0.75-0.50 × 100 on the right and plano -0.50 × 090 on the left, correctable in each 
eye to 20/15. He had a reading add of +2.00 OU. Ten days postflight, the astronaut with the 
scotoma had a visual acuity that was correctable to 20/15 with a cycloplegic refraction of +0.75-
0.50 × 105 on the right and to +0.75-0.75 × 090 on the left. He never experienced losses in 
subjective best-corrected acuity, color vision, or stereopsis. Fundus examination revealed mild, 
nasal disc edema (grade 1 Frisén scale) of the right eye with choroidal folds extending from the 
disc into the macula.  
 
During this mission, another ISS long-duration astronaut reported the fifth case of decreased 
near-visual acuity after 3 weeks of spaceflight requiring additional 1 to 2 diopters (D) in his 
glasses to read procedures and handle equipment. CO2, cabin pressure, and oxygen (O2) were 
reported to be within the allowable levels during all missions and none of the astronauts were 
exposed to any toxic fumes.  
 
External expert consultants to NASA [3] concluded that “the data seem to point to an eye/orbit-
centered problem, and intracranial hypertension as the mechanism seems less likely, although it 
cannot be completely ruled out at this point in time”. In-flight ocular ultrasound exams were 
performed on the astronauts who represented the fourth and fifth cases of visual changes during 
a space mission to rule out increased ONSD, posterior globe flattening, detached retina, 
chorioretinopathy, raised optic disc, and confirm normal anterior eye anatomy. The ocular 
ultrasound was used because previous studies had validated the procedure [4-8] and NASA had 
successfully performed ultrasound examination of the eye on board the ISS with a nonexpert 
operator using remote guidance.[9] The remotely guided ultrasound examinations of the eye in 
these astronauts demonstrated posterior flattening of the globe, dilated optic nerve sheaths, 
bilaterally distended jugular veins, and a raised right optic disc in the astronaut with the scotoma 
(Figures 5 and 6). Image files of a near and far acuity chart and an Amsler grid were uploaded 
and printed on orbit. Both astronauts reported near-visual acuity decrements.  
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: On-orbit ultrasound of optic nerves of the fourth case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight. 
In-flight ultrasound shows proximal kinking and increased ONSD of approximately 12 mm that is consistent with 
raised ICPs. Optic nerve shown in purple and the ONSD in green. 
 
Three weeks after the ultrasound examination and Amlser grid testing, reading glasses (2.5 D 
and 3.25 D) were delivered to the ISS via a Shuttle mission and one astronaut reported that the 
3.25 D glasses worked best. A video-ophthalmoscope system was also delivered to the ISS from 
the Shuttle and remotely guided dilated fundoscopic exams (Figure 7) were performed on both 
astronauts during the presleep period (so other activities would not be impacted by the visual 
acuity loss from Tropicamide drops). The astronauts took turns being the operator and subject 
during these examinations and were given preflight fundoscopic images to use as references. 
The fundoscopic video and captured images were downloaded from the ISS and sent to neuro-
ophthalmological consultants who determined that the temporal location and shape of the 
OD 
OS 
   12 mm 
Elevation of optic 
Figure 5: On-orbit ultrasound of 
posterior orbit of the fourth case of 
visual changes from long-duration 
spaceflight. In-flight ultrasound 
image of the right eye showing 
posterior globe flattening and a 
raised optic disc consistent with 
optic-disc edema and raised ICP. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
12 
 
reported scotoma was thought to be consistent with disc edema (that is, enlarged blind spot). 
The other astronaut had a normal fundoscopic exam. Consultants agreed that no treatment was 
indicated at this time and that these images would serve as a baseline to follow throughout the 
rest of the mission. The inability to measure IOP on the ISS was also a factor in deferring any 
pharmacological interventions. Monthly remotely guided ocular ultrasound, dilated video 
fundoscopic, and visual acuity exams were performed for the duration of the mission. These 
images allowed experts on the ground to make a diagnosis of mild optic-disc edema in the right 
eye. Postflight fundus examination revealed mild, nasal optic-disc edema (grade 1 Frisén Scale) 
of the right eye with choroidal folds extending from the disc into the macula. Postflight OCT 
confirmed optic-disc edema and choroidal folds (Figure 8). 
 
 
   
 
Figure 8: OCT of the fourth case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight (right). Preflight Zeiss Stratus 
OCT showing the right and left NFL „TSNIT‟ curve (left). Postflight Zeiss Cirrus OCT showing increased thickness 
of nerve fiber layer „TSNIT‟ due to disc edema. Greater increase is noted in the right eye inferior consistent with 
postflight optic-disc photography. 
 
Figure 7: Fundus images from 
the ISS of the fourth case of 
visual changes from long-
duration spaceflight. (Top) 
Preflight optic nerve head 
photography. (Bottom left) In-
flight (ISS) photography of the 
right optic disc obtained by 
remote guidance showing “C” 
halo associated with Grade 1 
edema. (Bottom right) Postflight 
(R+10) shows the “C” halo 
edema effect in greater detail 
with subtle nerve fiber glutting 
beyond the border of the 
edematous disc (arrows).  
Adapted from Mader TH et al. 
[1] with permission from 
Elsevier, obtained via Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
13 
 
During the fourth and fifth astronauts‟ mission, immediate postflight astronaut return was 
implemented allowing for 3-Tesla MRI images of the eye to be obtained within 3 days of 
landing. Previously, astronauts were scheduled to recover for 21 days after landing in Star City, 
Russia and 3-Tesla MRI facilities were not available. As these crews did not have preflight 3-
Tesla head and orbit MRI‟s, the standard 1.5-Tesla head MRI, MRA, and MRV obtained upon 
selection into the ISS training flow, several years before mission assignment, were used to 
confirm the absence of increased ONSD or posterior globe flattening preflight. 
 
The MRI of the brain and orbits performed on the fourth astronaut 30 days after return 
documented bilateral severely dilated optic nerve sheaths, right greater than left, bilateral 
flattening of the posterior globe, right greater than left, and thickened tortuous optic nerves 
(Figures 9–11). An intracranial MRV and MRA subsequently obtained showed no 
abnormalities. A lumbar puncture, 57 days after return to Earth, documented an elevated 
opening pressure of 28.5 cm H2O with normal CSF composition.  
 
 
 
Figure 9: MRI (R+30 days) of the fourth case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight (a). There remains 
bilateral severe optic sheath dilatation. The right optic sheath diameter measures 10 to 11 mm (b and c); and the left 
optic sheath diameter measures 8 mm. These numbers are similar to the R+3 examination. There is evidence of 
papilledema on the right eye only. There is residual flattening of the posterior globes. The optic nerve remains 
thickened bilaterally measuring up to 5 mm on the right and 4 mm on the left. There also remains bilateral 
tortuosity of the optic nerve sheaths with the kink at the optic nerve sheath approximately 1.1 cm behind the 
posterior margin of the globe. Red arrow depicts the optic-disc edema, blue arrows show the flattened globe and the 
yellow arrows illustrate the distended optic nerve sheath.  Figure 9b reproduced from Mader TH et al. [1] with 
permission from Elsevier, obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
 
a. 
c. 
b. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
14 
 
 
Figure 10: MRI (R+30 days) of the fourth case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight. There is 
prominence of central T2-hyperintensity of the optic nerves bilaterally, right greater than left approximately 10 to 
12 mm posterior to the globe (arrow) that represents an element of optic nerve congestion. 
 
 
Figure 11: MRI (R+30 days) of the fourth case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight. Tortuous optic 
nerve and kink on left (arrow). Control orbit on right.  
 
The fifth case of visual changes observed on the ISS was noticed only 3 weeks into his mission. 
This change continued for the remainder of the mission without noticeable improvement or 
progression. He never complained of headaches, transient visual obscurations, diplopia, 
pulsatile tinnitus, or other visual changes.  
 
The preflight eye examination revealed a cycloplegic refraction of -5.75-1.25 × 010 on the right, 
and -5.00-1.50 × 180 on the left, correctable in each eye to 20/20 with a reading add of +1.75 
OU. Dilated eye examination and fundus photos were normal. Upon return to Earth he 
notedpersistence of the vision changes he observed in space. Postflight visual acuity was 
correctable to 20/20 OU with a manifest and cycloplegic refraction of -5.00-1.50 × 015 on the 
right and -4.75-1.75 × 170 on the left and a reading add of +2.25 OU. He never experienced 
losses in subjective best-corrected acuity, color vision, or stereopsis. His fundus examination 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
15 
 
was normal with no evidence of disc edema or choroidal folds. However, an MRI of the brain 
and orbits, and ultrasound of the globes performed 8 days after landing, revealed bilateral 
posterior globe flattening, distended optic nerve sheaths, and tortuous optic nerves. OCT 
showed significant NFL thickening relative to preflight values and a normal macula (Figure 12). 
A lumbar puncture was not performed. This case is interesting because the astronaut did not 
have disc edema or choroidal folds but was documented to have NFL thickening, globe 
flattening, a hyperopic shift, and subjective complaints of loss of near vision.  
 
 
 
Figure 12: OCT (R+13 days) of the fifth case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight (left). Preflight 
Zeiss Cirrus OCT showing right and left NFL „TSNIT‟ (right). Postflight Zeiss Cirrus OCT shows increased 
thickness of the nasal (red arrow) NFL. Greater increase is noted in the right eye in the nasal quadrant NFL 
thickness; 42 μm preflight to 70 μm postflight. Fundus and optic-disc imaging did not show presence of observable 
disc edema. 
 
 
The sixth case of visual changes of an ISS astronaut was reported after return to Earth from a 
6-month mission, when he noticed that his far vision was clearer through his reading glasses. 
A fundus examination was performed 3 weeks postflight that documented mild (grade 1) nasal 
optic-disc edema in the right eye only. There was no evidence of disc edema in the left eye or 
choroidal folds in either eye (Figure 13). MRI of the brain and orbits, performed 46 days after 
return, revealed bilateral flattening of the posterior globe, right greater than left, and a mildly 
distended right optic nerve sheath. There was also evidence of optic-disc edema in the right 
eye.  
 
Fundus examination and OCT, performed 60 days postflight, documented mild disc edema and 
a „new onset‟ cotton-wool spot in the left eye 2-disc diameters superior temporal to the disc, 
just inside the superior arcade. This was not observed in the fundus photographs taken 3 weeks 
postflight (Figure 14). 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
16 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 14: OCT of sixth case of visual changes from long-duration spaceflight. Preflight Zeiss Stratus OCT 
showing the NFL „TSNIT‟ curve. Postflight Zeiss Cirrus OCT showing a 50 µ increase in thickness (50% increase) 
of the nerve fiber layer at the superior and inferior poles (red arrow) consistent with changes seen in postflight optic 
nerve head photography.Choroidal folds are also visible (white arrow).  
 
Figure 13: Fundus examination of the 
sixth case of visual changes from long-
duration spaceflight. Preflight images 
of normal optic disc. Postflight right 
and left optic disc showing grade 1 
(superior and nasal) edema at the right 
optic disc. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
17 
 
The seventh case of visual changes associated with spaceflight is significant in that is was 
eventually treated postflight. His preflight cycloplegic refraction was +1.25 sphere in both eyes 
with a normal fundus exam. Approximately 2 months into the ISS mission the astronaut reported 
a progressive decrease in his near and far acuity in both eyes that persisted for the remainder of 
the mission. At approximately 3 to 4 months into the 6-month mission he noticed that his normal 
„Earth‟ prescription progressive glasses were no longer strong enough for near tasks at which 
time he began using his stronger „Space Anticipation Glasses‟ (+1.25 D more plus). He never 
complained of transient visual obscurations, headaches, diplopia, pulsatile tinnitus, or vision 
changes during eye movement. The ISS cabin pressure, CO2, and O2 levels were reported to be at 
normal operating levels during the mission (of note, the CO2 levels on the ISS are nominally 
between 2.3 to 5.3 mm Hg, equal to 10-20 times the normal terrestrial atmospheric level, which 
is 0.23 mmHg). He was not exposed to any toxic substances. Three days after his return to Earth 
his visual acuity was correctable to 20/20 OU with a cycloplegic refraction of +2.75 sphere on 
the right, and +2.50 sphere on the left. He never experienced losses in subjective best-corrected 
acuity, color vision, or stereopsis. A fundus examination revealed mild bilateral optic-disc edema 
(grade 1), and choroidal folds (Figures 15 and 16). 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Preflight images of the right and left optic discs (upper). Postflight images of the ONH showing in more 
detail the extent of the edematous optic-disc margins and glutting of the superior and inferior nerve fiber layer 
axons OD and OS (arrows) (lower). 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
18 
 
   
Figure 16: Postflight at „return to Earth +39 days' (R+39) red-free fundus photography highlighting the extent of 
the horizontal choroidal and retinal folds in the posterior fundus (OD>OS). Adapted from Mader TH et al. [1] with 
permission from Elsevier, obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
An OCT confirmed optic-disc edema and choroidal folds. An MRI of the brain and orbits 
performed 6 days postflight documented bilateral flattening of the posterior globes, distended 
optic nerve sheaths and optic-disc edema. A lumbar puncture, 12 days after return to Earth, 
documented an elevated opening pressure of 28 cm H2O with normal CSF composition.  
 
The astronaut was treated with 500 mg Diamox twice daily and his opening pressure decreased 
to 19 cm H2O. This astronaut‟s creatinine increased to 1.8 after 2 weeks and therefore his dose 
was decreased to 250 mg twice daily for 3 months.  
 
The disc edema, posterior globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shift seen in cases 2, 
4, 6, and 7 appear consistent with findings of increased intracranial hypertension. Cases 2, 4, 6, 
and 7 presented with optic nerve sheath distention and posterior globe flattening as documented 
by MRI 23, 30, 46, 6, and 7 days post-mission, respectively. Additionally, cases 4 and 7 had 
elevated lumbar puncture opening pressures of 28.5 and 28 cm H2O at 57 days and 12 days, 
respectively after returning to Earth. The CSF opening pressures of cases 2 and 3 were measured 
66 days and 19 days, respectively after return to Earth and were not dramatically elevated but 
were above the normal range of approximately 10 to 20 cm H2O for a healthy adult [10].  
 
In summary, although a definitive etiology for these findings is unknown, it has been 
hypothesized that venous congestion in the brain and/or eye, brought about by cephalad-fluid 
shifts and which may have exacerbated choroidal volume changes, may be a unifying 
pathologic mechanism. In light of the observations of vision change, optic-disc edema, 
choroidal folds, and changes in the ocular ultrasound, head and orbit MRI, increased ICP, and 
fundoscopic image changes, NASA has initiated an enhanced occupational monitoring program 
for all mission astronauts with special attention to signs and symptoms related to ICP.  
 
Interestingly, similar findings have previously been reported among Russian cosmonauts who 
flew long-duration missions on the MIR Orbital Space Station (the station was operational until 
2001). The findings, published by Myasnikov and Stepanova in 2008 [11], were part of a study 
evaluating the retina by ophthalmoscopy, linear velocity of blood flow in the straight venous 
sinus of the brain by transcranial Doppler, and structural changes in the brain by MRI, under the 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
19 
 
premise that psychological difficulties reported in long-duration crewmembers could be caused 
by impaired in-flight cerebral hemodynamics. The study included 16 cosmonauts, of which 8 
were found to have mild to moderate optic-disc edema on landing day, corresponding to NASA‟s 
CPG class 3 and 4. In addition to optic-disc edema, transcranial Doppler confirmed elevation of 
linear velocity of blood flow in the straight venous sinus of the brain in 9 of 13 crewmembers 
who underwent Doppler testing, with flow velocities ranging from 30-47 cm/sec (normal range 
14-28 cm/sec). MRI of the brain was obtained in 10 of the crewmembers, with one exhibiting 
“signs of moderate intracranial hypertension” although the signs themselves are not described. 
This crewmember was noted to have congenital low-lying cerebellar tonsils, which were thought 
to have impeded CSF outflow from the cranium into the spinal canal. A second MRI obtained 
three months postflight reported resolution of the signs of intracranial hypertension. Of note, the 
spaceflight environment of the MIR was very similar to that of the ISS, including exposure to 
both microgravity and high levels of CO2.         
 
 
 
B. 
Summary of Human System Spaceflight Physiology 
1. 
Ocular Evidence 
This section is a compendium of how evidence gathered from the literature and astronaut data 
pertaining to anatomical and physiologic changes observed in relation to extended stay in 
spaceflight relates to pathophysiologic conditions on Earth that share common signs and 
symptoms with the former. It is intended to assist with the initial characterization of the risk of 
visual impairment and ICP. 
 
a) 
Visual Acuity Disturbance and Elevated ICP in Spaceflight 
 
Mader et al. provided a review of seven of the fifteen documented cases reported of male 
astronauts, 50.2 +/- 4.2 years, who have experienced in-flight visual changes [1]. Since Mader‟s 
publication, a review of data has identified eight additional cases, although some are identified 
with less precise detection methods. The seven cases described by Mader correspond to 
astronauts who spent 6 months on board the ISS. The ophthalmic findings consisted of disc 
edema in five cases, globe flattening in five (all of which demonstrated optic sheath distention), 
choroidal folds in five, „cotton-wool spots‟ in three, nerve fiber layer thickening detected by 
OCT in six, and decreased near vision in seven astronauts. Five out of seven cases with near 
vision complaints had a hyperopic shift of 0.50 D cycloplegic refractive change or more between 
pre and post-mission. Some of these refractive changes remain unresolved years after flight. 
Lumbar punctures performed in four cases with disc edema (out of 7) revealed opening pressures 
of 22, 21, 28, and 28.5 cm H2O, performed at 60, 19, 12, and 57 days post-mission, respectively. 
While the etiology remains unknown, it is proposed that these findings may represent 
manifestations of a pathologic process related to (but not limited to) the eye and the optic nerve, 
the brain, and the vascular system (venous congestion in the brain and the eye orbit), in concert 
with intracranial effects caused by cephalad-fluid shifts experienced during microgravity 
exposure.  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
20 
 
 
b) 
Intraocular Pressure (IOP) 
Intraocular pressure (IOP) is determined by the production, circulation and drainage of ocular 
aqueous humor and is described by the equation: 
 
IOP= F/C+PV 
 
where F=aqueous fluid formation rate, C = aqueous outflow rate, and PV = episcleral venous 
pressure. 
 
In the general population, IOP ranges between 10 and 20 mm Hg with an average of 15.5 mm 
Hg. Diurnal variation for normal eyes is between 3 and 6 mm Hg, with a nocturnal peak 
independent of body position change (Figure 17) [12-14]. Besides circadian variation, IOP has 
been shown to increase by 3 to 4 mm Hg in both normal and glaucomatous patients lying supine, 
regardless of the time of the day [15].  
Aqueous flow averages 2.9 µL/min in young healthy adults and 2.2 µL/min in octogenarians, 
and has a circadian pattern [16]. Twenty-four-hour assessment in glaucoma and sleep studies 
[14] evidenced that IOP peaks roughly around 5:00 to 5:30 in the morning (during sleep period), 
and aging has a shifting effect delaying the peak post-awakening [17]. Aqueous humor is 
produced in the ciliary body. There are two drainage routes for aqueous humor. The majority (up 
to 80%) is through the trabecular meshwork consisting of the uveal and corneoscleral meshwork, 
the endothelial lining of Schlemm‟s canal, the collecting channels and aqueous veins. After 
having passed through the trabecular outflow pathways, aqueous humor drains into the episcleral 
venous system. The second drainage route is via the uveoscleral outflow pathway that is less well 
defined and understood. Fluid in this pathway ultimately drains into the lymphatic system. 
Calculated uveoscleral outflow is 25% to 57% of total aqueous flow in healthy 20 to 30-year olds 
and decreases with age [16].  
 
Episcleral venous pressure in healthy humans is in the range of 7 to 14 mm Hg with values 
between 9 to 10 mm Hg typically [18]. This is the only component of aqueous humor dynamics 
that is affected by body position. Episcleral venous pressure increases by 3.6 mm Hg by 
changing body position from seated to supine. Any increase in episcleral venous pressure results 
in decreased trabecular meshwork aqueous outflow and a corresponding increase in IOP. In fact, 
a change in episcleral venous pressure of 0.8 mm Hg corresponds to a change in IOP of 1 mm 
Hg. Moreover, trabecular and uveoscleral outflow is reduced in ocular hypertension. 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
21 
 
 
Ocular hypertension, generally considered as an IOP greater than 21 mm Hg, is the most 
important risk for glaucoma. The Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study showed that the 
incidence of glaucomatous damage in subjects with ocular hypertension was up to 3% for IOPs 
of 21 to 25 mm Hg, up to 26% for IOPs of 26 to 30 mm Hg, and approximately 42% for subjects 
with an IOP higher than 30 mm Hg [19]. In approximately 3% of people with ocular 
hypertension, retinal vein occlusion may occur that could lead to vision loss. Age greater than 40 
years is a risk factor for the development of both ocular hypertension and primary open-angle 
glaucoma. An epidemiological study has also shown a relationship between glaucoma and 
myopic refractive error, age, and IOP [20]. Therefore, monitoring of IOP is currently performed 
in NASA astronauts during spaceflight missions on board the ISS. 
 
c) 
Optic-Disc Edema, Increased ICP, and Mechanical Deformation of the Globe  
The unique anatomy of the subarachnoid space allows the intracranial CSF to reach the orbital 
subarachnoid space (SAS), which presents a „cul-de-sac‟ anatomy at the ONH. The SAS 
contains a complex system of arachnoid trabeculae and septa that divide the subarachnoid space 
and that may play a role in the hydrodynamics of the CSF inside the optic nerve. The dural 
sheath surrounds the SAS, which in turn surrounds the optic nerve. Consequently, the optic nerve 
and disc can be affected by disorders of elevated ICP; as pressure increases in the intracranial 
space this could be transmitted to the ONH. This represents a third, and nonvascular means by 
which the IOP may be adversely impacted through mechanical deformation of the posterior 
globe. 
 
Jinkins [21] examined 20 subjects with increased ICP and papilledema, and found bulging of the 
terminal optic sheath subarachnoid space into the posterior aspect of the globe at the ONH in 18 
patients, regardless of the cause of ICP. It was determined that dilatation of the sheath 
surrounding the optic nerve resulted in a „ballooning‟ of the ONH, causing it to protrude into the 
globe. This resulted in an increased pressure gradient between the SAS and the vitreous with 
resultant transarachnoid transudation of fluid secondary to the pressure gradient, possibly into 
the optic disc and the vitreous of the globe. Thus, a significant factor in early disc swelling or 
Figure 17: Correlation between office and 
peak nocturnal IOP in healthy subjects and 
glaucoma patients. Reproduced from Mosaed 
S, Liu JHK, Weinreb RN [14], with 
permission from Elsevier, obtained via 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
22 
 
papilledema is papillary protrusion. Of note, Jinkins reported that protrusion precedes any 
obvious arterial abnormality in the optic disc and that such changes in the pressure gradient 
manifest rapidly, appearing within the first 24 hours of increased ICP. Thus, data collection close 
to the 24-hour mark of entry into microgravity may be an important benchmark. When severe 
dilatation of the distal optic subarachnoid space occurs, all of the regional neural as well as 
vascular structures are involved and are compressed and distorted. This mechanical action 
compromises flow emanating from all vascular sources as well as the venous drainage, leading to 
stasis, congestion, and decreased axonal perfusion [22, 23]. This has important implications in 
patients with abnormal pressure gradients at the ONH of variable duration, but with „normal‟ 
visual testing [24], as may be the case in long-duration spaceflight of up to 6 months. It indicates 
that injury to the optic nerve may already be significant by the time visual acuity begins to suffer. 
Conversely, three ISS astronauts have manifested a refractive change and no evidence of optic-
disc edema. 
 
d) 
Correlation of ICP to IOP – The Hydrodynamic and Vascular Relationship 
Currently, the gold standard for monitoring ICP is the ventriculostomy tube, which is not feasible 
in spaceflight. However, several authors have reported that ICP is related to IOP, which can 
serve as a surrogate measure [25-27]. This is based on the anatomical relationships between the 
intracranial contents and the eye. During cephalad-fluid shift, as occurs in microgravity or 
horizontal bed rest, venous pressure in the vessels above the heart increases. In addition, 
intracranial CSF volume increases [28]. Both of these phenomena increase total volume of the 
brain in the rigid cranium that increases ICP. Prolonged elevations in intracranial venous 
pressures, also known as venous insufficiency, may exacerbate ICP by precipitating cerebral 
interstitial edema due to an increased pressure gradient between the parenchymal interstitial 
space and the intracranial venous space. Normally, a certain amount of capillary fluid volume 
will diffuse into the interstitial space, carrying nutrients to cells and metabolic byproducts away 
from them. This diffusion process follows a favorable pressure gradient. However, if the post-
capillary venule pressure is elevated, there may be an accumulation of interstitial fluid, even in 
the face of elevated driving pressure, that contributes to intracranial volume and hence further 
raising ICP. 
 
Elevated ICPs are transmitted to the eye via the vascular connections. The ophthalmic vein is the 
primary venous conduit between the intracranial cavernous sinus, a thin-walled cavity that is 
easily compressible and receives venous blood draining from the eyes, brain, and face before 
draining out to the internal jugular veins, via the inferior petrosal sinuses. The cavernous sinus, a 
paired venous structure, lies in the base of the skull on either side of the sella turcica (which 
contains the pituitary gland) and slightly lateral and posterior to the optic chiasm. The lack of 
gravity-assisted drainage from the brain, under microgravity conditions, could result in a rise in 
cephalad venous pressure. The end result might be a relative decrease in the normal pressure 
gradient between the CSF and the venous blood. Presumably, this could lead to a chronic but 
uniform elevation in CSF pressure. As Kramer et al. suggest, one manifestation of this chronic 
elevation in ICP may be compression of the pituitary gland. In fact, pituitary dome concavity, 
suggestive of chronic pituitary gland compression by increased ICP, was recently documented by 
MRI after spaceflight [29]. Resting directly upon the cavernous sinus is the subarachnoid space 
and the third ventricle that both circulate CSF, in addition to the mass of the cerebral 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
23 
 
hemispheres. Thus, increases in ICP due to elevated CSF pressure, cerebral edema, and or 
venous congestion will be transmitted directly to the cavernous sinus and the ophthalmic vein. 
This relationship has been documented in previous studies. Khanna et al. [30] identified 11 
patients with elevated ICP (> 20 mm Hg, equivalent to >27 cm H2O) (range 25 to 40 mm Hg, 
equivalent to 34 to 54 cm H2O), due to cerebral edema, that demonstrated bilateral superior 
ophthalmic vein (SOV) enlargement equal to or greater than 3 mm. Lirng et al. [31] and Chen et 
al. [32] reported SOV diameters in patients with normal ICP to be 1.6 mm and 1.83 mm 
respectively. Khanna et al. [30] found that the SOV enlargements followed ICP elevations either 
immediately or several hours later. More importantly, the SOV enlargement resolved after 
treatment for the cerebral edema and normalization of ICP. Lirng et al. [31] compared the SOV 
diameters of 18 patients with elevated ICP (>20 cm H2O, up to 40 cm H2O, SOV = 3.0 mm), and 
48 patients with normal ICP (6 to 20 cm H2O) SOV = 1.6 mm, and found a significant difference 
between the measurements (P < .001). Note that 20 and 40 cm H2O equal to 14.7 and 29.4 mm 
Hg, respectively. In a subsequent study, Chen et al. [32] compared SOV diameters in 13 patients 
with normal ICP (mean = 12.63 cm H20) and 13 with intracranial hypotension (mean = 3.5 cm 
H2O) and found a significantly reduced SOV diameter in the hypotensive ICP group (0.90 mm) 
compared to the normal ICP group (1.85 mm), further evidence of the relationship of intracranial 
hydrodynamics between the intracranial contents and the SOV. 
As the ophthalmic vein and its tributaries that drain venous blood from the eye have no valves, 
impaired venous outflow or even retrograde flow may occur in the face of elevated pressures 
transmitted from the cavernous sinus. The ophthalmic vein supports all venous drainage from the 
eye. Its two branches; the superior ophthalmic vein and the much smaller inferior ophthalmic 
vein, merge to drain into the cavernous sinus. Elevated ICP and venous pressures are ultimately 
transmitted to the eye, via the ophthalmic vein, along three pathways. The most significant is via 
the choroidal veins that drain blood from the choroid, a rich vascular network that lies between 
the outer sclera of the eye and the inner retina. The choroidal veins drain into the vortex veins 
that subsequently drain into the superior and inferior ophthalmic vein. Almost the entire blood 
supply of the eye comes from the choroidal vessels. Thus, relatively large shifts in volume can 
occur, in comparison to other ocular vasculature, thereby contributing significantly to IOP. 
According to Smith and Lewis [33], 20 µL of additional blood volume in the choroid can an IOP 
increase up to 20 mm Hg.  
 
The second pathway is via the episcleral veins, which lie within the sclera and drain the 
percolated aqueous humor from the anterior chamber after it passes through the trabecular 
meshwork. The episcleral veins drain both indirectly into the vortex veins via the anterior ciliary 
veins, and directly into the vortex veins, which drain into the superior and inferior ophthalmic 
vein. It is well known from the study of glaucoma, that elevations in episcleral venous pressure 
cause a direct rise in IOP due to the decreased facility (outflow) of aqueous humor via the 
trabecular meshwork, thereby increasing the pressure within the anterior chamber of the eye 
[16]. In contrast, choroidal engorgement elevated IOP due to increases in episcleral venous 
pressure can take 20 minutes or more to occur. In summary, episcleral venous pressure is 
influenced by venous drainage pressure in the superior/inferior ophthalmic veins, cavernous 
sinus, and even internal and external jugular veins, a contributing mechanism for rising IOP in 
the supine position [13]. Thus, any abnormality leading to increased venous pressure in the 
venous drainage system downstream from the eye can lead to elevated IOP if the episcleral 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
24 
 
venous pressure is increased as occurs in jugular vein obstruction, superior vena cava obstruction 
and cavernous sinus thrombosis [16].  
 
The third and most minimal route of transmission of elevated venous pressure and ICP is via the 
central retinal vein (CRV). The effect of CRV engorgement on IOP is likely minimal; however, 
rising retinal vein pressures can cause retinal hemorrhages. The CRV drains venous blood from 
the retina. It exits the eye alongside the retinal artery through the optic nerve before exiting the 
subarachnoid space and the optic nerve sheath. Beyond that point, it has several anatomical 
variations and may join the superior or sometimes the inferior ophthalmic vein, or less often the 
cavernous sinus directly [34]. The CRV is also directly influenced by ICP during its course 
through the subarachnoid space within the optic nerve sheath. 
 
e) 
ICP and IOP Correlation Studies 
Given the vascular and hydrodynamic relationships between the intracranial compartment and 
the eye, several researchers have suggested detecting increases in ICP noninvasively by 
measuring IOP. Lashuka et al. [25] compared measurements of ICP to IOP in 27 patients with a 
mean age of 59.6 years, 56% male, all with ventriculostomy tubes. The IOP readings were taken 
with a handheld tonometer. All patients with an abnormal ICP value (> 20 cm H2O) had an 
elevated IOP (> 20 cm H2O, or 14.7 mm Hg), and all patients with a normal ICP (< 20 cm H2O) 
had a normal IOP (<20 cm H20, or 14.7 mm Hg). A high correlation was found between ICP and 
IOP, with r = 0.83. In another prospective study, [26] measured IOP in 50 patients with a mean 
age of 33.6 years, 58% women, all undergoing a clinically indicated lumbar puncture. Elevated 
ICP was defined as > 14.76 mm Hg (20 cm H2O), and elevated IOP as > 20.5 mm Hg. Of the 27 
patients with an increased ICP, 23 had an elevated IOP. There was a significant correlation 
between ICP and IOP, r = 0.955 (P < .001). In contrast, [35] Czarnik et al. [36] found no 
correlation between ICP and IOP (r = 0.227) after serial measurements in 40 coma patients with 
ventriculostomy. 
 
However, other observations pose doubt as to the correlation between IOP and ICP and therefore 
the value of IOP as a predictive measure of ICP [36, 37].  
 
Recently, Spentzas [27] offered an eloquent explanation for why IOP may not always correlate 
well with ICP in a prospective study of 36 children with severe head injuries. They found that the 
correlation of ICP with IOP disappeared below the normal cutoff for raised ICP (< 20 cm H2O) 
(r = 0.274). However, when ICP was > 20 cm H2O the correlation became significant (r = 0.705). 
Consequently, Spentzas et al. reported that handheld tonometry had a good ability to rule in 
elevated ICP (> 20 cm H2O) with a specificity of 97.4% [27]. Thus, IOP measurements had a 
high positive predictive value, making it a good screening test to rule in elevated ICP, but only at 
elevated ICP values.  
 
f) 
IOP in Spaceflight 
Preliminary data has shown that IOP is elevated above ground-based values upon initial 
exposure to microgravity. As there are no valves in the veins in the eye and the brain, there is no 
venous pump as in the legs, to facilitate blood return to the heart. Thus, in microgravity, where 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
25 
 
no venous pump or gravity exist, blood stagnates and accumulates in the veins, which results in 
the distended facial and neck veins noted in astronauts, a reflection of the elevated venous 
pressure. This has also been recorded as changes in leg girth, facial edema, and verbal reports of 
head fullness and nasal stuffiness. The venous engorgement elevates the cerebral post-capillary 
venous pressure. Congestion in the venous system will cause a concomitant rise in pressure in 
the episcleral vessels of the eye and will increase the resistance to aqueous-humor outflow, 
leading to a rise in IOP (Mader et al. [16, 38]). 
 
Two experiments have examined IOP in parabolic flight. Draeger and colleagues documented a 
mean 5-mm increase in IOP during the free-fall phase of parabolic flight with a hand-held 
applanation tonometer, which has been superseded by more accurate instruments [39]. Mader et 
al. [38] also measured IOP during parabolic flight using a TonoPen. They found that IOP 
increased 7 mm Hg on average, from a mean baseline value of 12 mm Hg, to an in-flight mean 
of 19 mm Hg (N = 11).  A number of investigators have recorded IOP values during the initial 
phases of spaceflight. Draeger [39] reported an initial 20% to 25% increase in IOP 44 minutes 
into a Shuttle flight using a hand-held applanation tonometer. In a subsequent experiment, 
Draeger et al. [40] documented a 92% increase in IOP in two cosmonauts on board a Soyuz 
vehicle, bound for the Mir Space Station, 16 minutes after reaching microgravity [40]. In a 
follow-up 6-day experiment on board STS-55, the German D2 mission, diurnal IOP was 
recorded and a 114% increase in IOP was noted 16 minutes after reaching microgravity [41]. 
However, subsequent values were not significantly higher than preflight values. Astronauts with 
higher baseline IOP may be particularly vulnerable to a rise in IOP associated with microgravity 
exposure [20]. 
 
However, previous bed rest and KC-135 parabolic flight studies have documented that this rise 
in IOP is almost instantaneous [42]. As aqueous humor is produced by the ciliary body at a rate 
of only 3 L/min, it would take several minutes at least for this mechanism to cause a 
measureable rise in IOP. Thus the quick rise in IOP after assuming the recumbent position or 
upon entering microgravity cannot be explained on the basis of increased episcleral venous 
pressure alone. This sudden rise in IOP is more likely caused by engorgement of intraocular 
uveal tissue, principally the choroid. The choroid is drained by the vortex veins and lacks auto 
regulation. With the head in the dependent position, or with the cephalad-fluid shifts associated 
with microgravity, the pressure in the vortex venous system rises. This rise in venous pressure is 
thought to inhibit venous drainage from the choroid thus causing a relatively stagnant expansion 
of blood in the choroidal vasculature. As ocular fluids within the eye are incompressible this 
sudden bolus of blood within the choroid would lead to an abrupt increase in IOP. This theory is 
further supported by the fact that immediately upon sitting up from a prolonged head-down 
position and upon returning to Earth after spaceflight, IOPs are lower than baseline.  
 
Figure 18 depicts IOP values for eleven subjects over six Shuttle missions. The largest 
percentage of data is available for the first 6 days of flight and depicts a sharp rise in IOP over 
baseline values. Pre- and postflight data are not as well represented. Additional data is required 
to determine the effect of return to gravity postflight on IOP. Similarly, the last several days of 
flight is poorly characterized, with only four subjects represented, two with only a single data 
point. The IOP trend towards the end of a mission is of particular interest due to the insight it 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
26 
 
would provide regarding physiologic effects and its application to longer-duration missions, for 
example, ISS increments [38-40]. 
 
Figure 18: IOP values for eleven subjects over six Shuttle missions [38-40]. FD= flight day 
 
g) 
Bed Rest and IOP 
In normal Earth gravity, it is clear from a number of studies that IOP is influenced by changes in 
body posture[13, 14, 20, 39, 42-50], the most common of which is the transition from the 
upright, or seated, position to the supine posture. Bed rest studies, which are designed to simulate 
microgravity conditions in certain aspects of human physiology, have provided limited data on 
the long-term course of IOP.  
 
In a study of four male subjects exposed to 120 days of horizontal bed rest, Kuzmin [50] found 
that IOP increased to 28 to 30 mm Hg. In two of the subjects, the increase in IOP was 
accompanied by visual disorders in the form of clouding of vision and a decrease in visual 
acuity. Kuzmin further concluded that it was possible that impaired regulation of IOP was 
occurring under prolonged bed rest, and that subjects over 45 years of age and those with 
autonomic dysfunction could be at increased risk. Similar changes in IOP were noted by Kuzmin 
et al. [50] in a previous 62-day horizontal bed rest study [50]. Mader et al. [42] examined IOP 
and visual acuity measured in nine men aged 19 to 29 during 48 hours of 10-degree head-down 
tilt (HDT). There was a diurnal variation in IOP, with values lowest early in the morning and 
highest at noon. Baseline IOP was 11.2 mm Hg seated, and rose to 17.9 mm Hg within seconds 
of subjects assuming the head-down position. Mader et al. [1] noted that an increase in episcleral 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
27 
 
venous pressure would elevate IOP due to backflow resistance, yet aqueous flow is less than or 
equal to 3 µL/min [16] , so such a large increase in IOP would take at least several minutes to 
occur and would not lead to the observed rapid spike in IOP. This could however, be explained 
by an engorgement of intraocular uveal tissue, principally the choroid, secondary to cephalad-
fluid shift. Normally, blood in the choroid is drained through the vortex veins. When the head 
remains in the recumbent position, venous blood may pool in the choroid due to the effects of 
gravity. As the choroidal blood flow lacks autoregulation, there is little resistance to fluid 
accumulation aside from the tamponade effect of rising IOP. As noted by [33], a sudden rise in 
choroidal blood volume of only 20 μL may result in an immediate rise in IOP of more than 20 
mm Hg. Retinal circulation is characterized by a low blood flow while flow in the choroid is 
high. The choroidal circulation is mainly controlled by sympathetic innervation and is not 
autoregulated. Retinal circulation lacks autonomic innervation, shows an efficient autoregulation 
and is mainly influenced by local factors[51]. Therefore, small fluctuations in choroidal blood 
volume during positional changes may cause sudden and significant increases in IOP. Mader et 
al. [42] also noted that when subjects assumed the head-down position, IOP increased a mean of 
4.7 mm Hg. When they sat up 48 hours later, IOP had decreased 6.7 mm Hg on average. Because 
these two IOPs were statistically different Mader„s group concluded that a greater volume of 
blood was displaced at the end of the 48 hours than at time zero. In agreement with this 
observations, IOP monitoring of bed rest subjects in 6-degree HDT for 14 days at the NASA 
flight analogs unit revealed that IOP increased on average 1.8 mm Hg (+13.3%) at bed rest day 
(BR) 3 and 1.7 mm Hg (+12.6%) at BR 10 from baseline. By 2 days after bed rest, IOP 
decreased on average 1.1 mm Hg (-7.2%) from BR 10 [43]. If choroidal blood volume shifts are 
responsible for the IOP changes observed, a choroidal reservoir of increasing volume appears to 
develop over 48 hours of HDT. This phenomenon may explain the preponderance of choroidal 
folds seen in the affected ISS astronauts, reflecting vascular congestion.  
 
Xu et al. [20] evaluated IOP in 65 males, with a mean age of 22.5 years, during 21 minutes of 
15-degree HDT to assess whether myopic individuals were more sensitive to cephalad-fluid 
shifts than emmetropes and low myopic subjects. Baseline mean values of IOP in the low 
myopia eyes and emmetropic eyes were similar (15.09 +/- 3.20 mm Hg and 14.71 +/- 3.07 mm 
Hg, respectively) while those in the moderate myopic eyes appeared slightly higher (16.59 +/- 
3.50 mm Hg). In the 15-degree HDT position, the mean value of IOP was increased in all 
subjects at every test point when compared to their respective baseline values. The IOP in the 
moderate myopic group was higher than the emmetropic and low myopic groups at 1, 6, and 11 
minutes after the initiation of the 15-degree HDT test (P, 0.05), and reached a peak of 21 mm Hg 
at 6 minutes. The results suggested that IOP in the moderate myopia group was more sensitive to 
postural change. Jonas et al. [52] offered an explanation for the increased susceptibility to 
elevated IOPs in myopic individuals. The structure of the lamina cribrosa (LC) is explained in 
detail in its own section. Because the LC forms the border between the intraocular space with a 
higher pressure and the retrobulbar space with a lower pressure, a pressure gradient exists across 
the LC as the difference in IOP minus pressure in the retrobulbar cerebrospinal fluid space. This 
TLP is of importance in ocular diseases in which the pressure on one or both sides of the LC is 
either abnormally high or abnormally low [22, 23]. The TLP depends on the difference in 
pressure and the thickness of the LC, thus Jonas et al. suggested one may infer that the reduced 
thickness of the LC in highly myopic eyes is the histologic correlate of an increased 
susceptibility to glaucoma. In highly myopic eyes, as found in the work by Jonas et al. [52], the 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
28 
 
LC is significantly thinner than in nonhighly myopic eyes that decreases the distance between the 
intraocular space and the CSF space and steepens the TLP at a given IOP, which may explain the 
increased susceptibility to glaucoma in highly myopic eyes. Taking into account that the myopic 
stretching of the globe and the secondary enlargement of the ONH increases with increasing 
axial myopia, Jonas et al. suggested that the susceptibility to glaucomatous optic nerve fiber loss 
is related to the degree of high axial myopia. 
 
Chiquet et al. [44] measured IOP in 25 healthy female subjects using noncontact tonometer while 
seated as well as 1, 3, and 10 minutes after lying flat. IOP rapidly increased; IOP increased 2 mm 
Hg compared to sitting after 1 minute and was relatively stable at this level throughout the 10 
minutes of monitoring. This observation of an elevation in IOP while supine is consistent with 
other studies [12, 45, 46]. 
 
The cephalad-fluid shift during the transition from an upright to a head-down posture would be 
expected to result in even greater elevations in IOP as the hydrostatic gradients are reversed 
compared to standing or sitting. In an extreme illustration, Draeger et al. [39] observed that IOP, 
measured with the same hand-held applanation tonometer as the one used during spaceflight 
studies, almost tripled in 20 healthy volunteers when they moved from the +90-degree head-up 
position (~12 mm Hg) to -90-degree head-down position (~34 mm Hg) in increments of 45 
degrees. Similar increases were observed upon inversion by other investigators [47, 48]. As had 
been observed [53], IOP increased from head-up to the supine posture, but the elevation in IOP 
was more dramatic once subjects progressed beyond the supine posture to head-down positions. 
The influence of the respective height of the hydrostatic column relative to the gravity vector is 
clear when measuring local pressure changes during posture transitions; changes in leg arterial 
pressures appear to be concurrent and inversely related to the alterations in IOP [39]. It must be 
noted, however, that acute radical tilts do not reflect a spaceflight analog condition and these 
results should be taken for their own relevance.  
 
Therefore, as spaceflight is not simulated by such extreme postures as inversion, it seems more 
reasonable to explore the effects of a more moderate head-down position on IOP. Draeger et al. 
[39] examined ten men during 90 minutes of 10-degree HDT. There was an immediate elevation 
of IOP with HDT that reached a maximum (~24 mm Hg) after 15 minutes. IOP decreased 
somewhat by 45 minutes of HDT and was stable through the end of the tilt, although still higher 
than the level observed during the seated posture. The effects of HDT on IOP also were present, 
although attenuated, when subjects were dehydrated by a sauna exposure that reduced their body 
weight by 2% before tilt. In this spaceflight model of induced plasma volume loss, the initial 
elevation of IOP was less severe and the peak pressure was acquired and resolved in a shorter 
time when subjects were dehydrated but the pattern of intraocular responses to tilt remained. In a 
similar investigation of the acute effects of HDT, IOP, blood pressure, and ocular perfusion 
pressure were elevated upon the assumption of 7-degree HDT and remained elevated through at 
least 90 minutes of tilt [14], resulting in a decrease in choroidal pulsatile ocular blood flow. A 
wide range of responses to HDT in these subjects suggest that some subjects may be more 
susceptible to the effects of the cephalic fluid shifts, in agreement with the observation that some 
but not all astronauts have indications of increased ICPs and visual disturbances[1].   
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
29 
 
While the cephalad-fluid shift with transient changes in posture and the resulting influence on 
IOP is not unexpected, the more chronic effects of head-down bed rest as a model of spaceflight 
may be more relevant to astronauts on board ISS. The well-recognized diuresis secondary to 
HDT might modify or attenuate IOP during the course of bed rest, although the continued 
hydrostatic gradient may result in filling of the choroidal vessels and increase of episcleral 
pressures [39]. Draeger et al. also observed that IOP decreased during lower body negative 
pressure used to reverse the cephalad-fluid shift, and the pressure was restored when the 
decompression of the lower body was released. 
 
Data from short-duration bed rest studies appear to indicate that the transient elevation of IOP 
with assumption of the head-down position is resolved as the body adapts to the altered 
hydrostatic pressures. For example, Mader et al. [42] measured IOP, retinal vascular diameters, 
and visual acuity in nine men before, during, and after 48 hours of 10-degree HDT bed rest. As 
expected, the change from the seated posture to HDT resulted in an immediate increase in IOP, 
measured by pneumatonometer, and diurnal variation was noted using measurements repeated 
every 6 hours during bed rest. The short duration of this bed rest period did not result in any 
changes in IOP when comparing the HDT posture from the start to the end of bed rest (except for 
the diurnal variation), but the authors did report that seated IOP was less after than before bed 
rest. In a companion study of the same subjects during this 10-degree HDT period, Frey et al. 
[54] reported a 4% increase in the size of the optic disc. Retinal artery and vein diameters were 
greater and IOPs were lower during the seated rest period before assumption of the HDT posture, 
but there was no change in these during bed rest. Additionally, in these subjects, as bed rest 
progressed, thoracic fluid volume decreased concomitantly with tendency for middle cerebral 
artery velocity to decrease. The decrease in middle cerebral artery velocities was inversely 
correlated with the change in retinal vasculature caliber. This observation agrees with those made 
by Friberg and Weinreb [47] during inversion (hanging upside-down). In a slightly longer bed 
rest duration, Chiquet et al.[44] measured IOP and corneal thickness in eight women during and 
after 7 days of 6-degree HDT bed rest. In these subjects, IOP measured in the HDT position 
progressively decreased through the course of bed rest, becoming statistically significant after 5 
days of bed rest. IOP recovered to pre-bed rest levels after just 2 days of normal activity. 
Concurrent increases in corneal thickness were reported in these subjects, after a similar time 
course during and after bed rest. The authors suggested that the decreasing IOP represents a 
physiologic adaptation to the HDT position, which is not fully explained by the bed rest-induced 
diuresis that would be expected to have occurred earlier in the bed rest period. 
While not measuring IOP, an earlier study by Drozdova and Nesterenko is the first known study 
to examine the effects of simulated microgravity on ocular structure and function [55]. Sixteen 
healthy subjects were studied before, during, and after 70 days of bed rest. The specific 
conditions of hypodynamia studied were not clearly delineated in this report, but the effects 
reported were profound. After 45 days of hypodynamia, visual acuity had decreased by 21%, the 
visual field decreased by 11 degrees, and the near point of clear vision had been extended by 3.5 
cm. Interestingly, IOP was reported to have decreased by 3 mm Hg from a prestudy level of 20 
mm Hg. The authors reported that the visual function had decreased further at 67 days of 
hypodynamia, characterized by the visual field decreasing by 15 degrees and the near point of 
clear vision extended to 12.5 cm from prestudy. The authors failed to indicate the timing of their 
ophthalmic examinations relative to the study timeline, but they reported that changes in visual 
function appeared to be coupled with structural changes within the eye. The optic disc appeared 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
30 
 
to have faded and the temporal borders were indistinct. Additionally, both the veins and the 
arteries of the eye appeared to be enlarged. In particular, the authors noted that the veins were 
distended and exhibited a deeper coloration. 
 
Clearly, such longer-duration bed rest studies are more likely to be relevant to astronauts 
participating in the current long-duration missions on board the ISS. One other study has 
examined the effects of longer bed rest on IOP and vision. In the short report by Mekjavic et al. 
[56], the authors reported no changes in visual function in any of the 10 subjects who 
participated in 35 days of horizontal bed rest. Unfortunately, the authors failed to report whether 
IOP changed during this protocol, although they state it was measured. Interpretation of these 
results relative to other studies; however, is hampered by two important factors. First, the 
measurements were not made until the second or third day after bed rest had been completed, 
during which time some recovery from bed rest may have occurred. Second, this was a 
horizontal bed rest, which acute studies have suggested does not have as dramatic an effect on 
IOP. 
 
Encouragingly, the changes in the visual function and structure after 70 days of hypodynamia in 
the study by Drozdova and Nesterenko recovered somewhat when subjects resumed their normal 
activities [55]. Twenty days after the end of the hypodynamia condition, ophthalmic examination 
revealed that the arteries of the eye had returned to their normal size, the veins were less 
distended, and the optic disk was pink with sharp boundaries. Concomitantly, visual acuity and 
the size of the visual field had recovered to some extent but these were not at prestudy baseline. 
Unfortunately, it appears that no follow-up examinations were completed beyond the 20 days 
post-hypodynamia therefore this study does not provide any clues as to whether these observed 
changes in vision and ocular structure were long-lasting or permanent. While it is difficult to 
correlate these changes to spaceflight-induced alterations in vision with any certainty, it is 
relevant to note that vision changes among long-duration astronauts do not consistently resolve 
after spaceflight either[1]. 
 
In conclusion, it is apparent that IOP is transiently elevated above the seated and supine 
pressures upon the assumption of the head-down posture as a model of spaceflight; this change 
in posture would correspond to the initial insertion into orbit. The rapid increase in IOP, 
concomitant with a cephalad-fluid shift, also has been observed during microgravity periods in 
parabolic flight [38]. However, available bed rest data suggest that elevated IOP resolves over 
time. Unfortunately, to-date, insufficient long-term spaceflight data are available to confirm 
whether these observations in bed rest can be used to better understand the effects during and 
develop countermeasures to microgravity. In-flight testing of IOP was initiated recently and as 
the data is available, it will be used in evaluation of the bed rest model for this risk. Of note, 
ocular hypotony has been recognized to result in optic disk edema, globe flattening, choroidal 
folds, and hyperopic shifts of similar magnitude to those observed in astronauts [1]. 
 
To reveal subtle morphological changes in the eye during simulated microgravity for 
spaceflights, Shinojima et al. measured subfoveal choroidal thickness and foveal retinal 
thickness during 10-degree HDT. They hypothesized that elevated ophthalmic vein pressure 
during simulated microgravity increases subfoveal choroidal thickness via enlargement of the 
choroidal vasculature and greater choroidal blood volume. Subfoveal choroidal thickness and 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
31 
 
IOP were increased by HDT during simulated microgravity, although no change in foveal retinal 
thickness was observed [49].  
 
h) 
Optic-Disc Edema 
Optic disc edema, is typically associated with an increase in ICP (in which case it is referred to 
as papilledema), and is characterized by deformation of the ONH and swelling of the optic disc. 
It is also described as the dilatation or „ballooning‟ of the ONH, causing it to protrude into the 
eye globe. Optic-disc edema has been observed in five American astronauts manifesting visual 
alterations after return from long-duration missions.  
 
According to a study by Jinkins [21], certain features were frequently found in patients with 
papilledema compared to normal controls, irrespective of the cause of intracranial hypertension. 
These features included: a dilated optic nerve sheath seen in all 20 patients on IV-contrast thin-
section orbital CT; a „bulging‟ of the terminal optic sheath subarachnoid space into the posterior 
aspect of the globe at the ONH in eighteen of twenty patients with clinical papilledema; and 
depressed perfusion of the optic disk/nerve junction as measured by dynamic CT at the time of 
papilledema diagnosis in all six patients with chronic symptomatology (greater than 4-weeks 
duration). ICP can affect the optic-nerve head in diseases such as pseudotumor cerebri, a 
condition where the ICP is greater than IOP, resulting in swelling of the ONH. In addition to this 
protrusion, there may be a variable amount of associated intercellular fluid (true edema) 
accumulation within the optic papilla due to either primary tissue ischemia, an increased pressure 
gradient between the subarachnoid space and the vitreous of the globe with resultant 
transarachnoid transudation of fluid, and/or the extravascular extravasation of fluid secondary to 
this pressure gradient. A significant factor in the proximate cause of early edema is stagnant 
axonal transport (stasis) with added vascular congestion, leakage, and ischemia leading to disc 
swelling [57]. When severe dilatation of the distal optic subarachnoid space occurs, all of the 
regional neural as well as vascular structures are compressed and distorted to varying degrees. 
When such forces are applied to the sensitive retrolaminar area and contiguous disc, flow 
emanating from all vascular sources as well as the venous drainage is believed to be 
compromised, thus leading to stasis. Several investigators report that the demonstrated axonal 
swelling is a response to the increased pressure gradient and axoplasmic stasis [21, 58]. Similar 
swelling of the optic-nerve head can occur in ocular hypotony, where the translaminar pressure 
difference is produced by low IOP rather than elevated ICP. In both conditions optic-nerve head 
changes are caused by an increase in translaminar pressure. This biomechanical approach [59, 
60] to understanding the stress (force/cross-sectional area) and strain (local deformation) on the 
ONH may yield clues as to the determinants of axonal, glial, and vascular dysfunction in the 
pathogenesis and progression of glaucoma and papilledema. 
(1) 
Visual loss in papilledema 
 
Visual symptoms frequently accompany papilledema that can lead to permanent visual loss if left 
untreated. The following are signs and mechanisms identified in the pathophysiology of 
papilledema [61]:  
  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
32 
 
a) The development of opticociliary shunt vessels and diversion of retinal venous outflow to 
the vortex/ciliary circulation, secondary to compressive forces causing progressive 
central retinal vein occlusion.  
b) Progressive and permanent loss of peripheral retinal nerve fibers: both small and large 
fibers are affected, but more peripheral fibers are affected earlier and to a greater extent, 
mainly superiorly, producing a visual field defect characterized by an arcuate shape. OCT 
analysis of astronauts with optic-disc edema has shown a distinct predilection for RNFL 
thickening in the superior and inferior distributions. Serial examinations of the RNFL 
may be a good indicator of stable or declining clinical course. 
c) Retinal nerve fiber layer infarcts and cotton-wool spots: retinal nerve fiber layer infarcts 
are seen in severe cases of papilledema and cotton-wool spots are sentinels of the axonal 
damage. Cotton-wool spots comprise localized accumulations of axoplasmic debris 
within adjacent bundles of unmyelinated ganglion cell axons. Their formation is widely 
held to reflect focal ischemia from terminal arteriolar occlusion. 
d) Enlargement of the blind spot: enlargement of the blind spot in patients with papilledema 
has been attributed to accumulation of peripapillary subretinal fluid and elevation of the 
surrounding tissue, thus changing the refractive status when measuring the blind spot 
during vision field testing. The accumulation of fluid is evidenced by a hyporeflective 
subretinal space in OCT scans.  An additional effect is the reduction in the collection of 
light by the photoreceptors as they misalign with the line of propagation of the light rays. 
 
(2) 
Anatomical characteristics associated with papilledema 
 
a) Crowded disc: Crowded disc refers to the tight crowding of fiber bundles at the disc 
border due to a smaller diameter of the ONH. The diameter of the scleral opening seems 
to be a determinant of this, so that eyes with smaller scleral openings tend to have more 
blurring of the disc margins by overlying nerve fibers. Of note, mean RNFL thickness is 
increased in both papilledema and congenital crowding of the optic nerve, for which a 
distinction between these two entities, especially on a case-by-case basis may not be 
possible by OCT alone. Thickening of the RNFL has been noted in VIIP affected 
astronauts postflight in comparison to their preflight baseline.  
b) Increased optic nerve sheath diameter (ONSD): With increasing ICP, the local 
compartment of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) predominantly in the retrobulbar portion of 
the optic nerve is distended by hydrostatic transmittance of CSF pressure within the SAS; 
thus, resulting in an increase in the local optic nerve sheath diameter (ONSD), even 
before papilledema appears. These phenomena precede the onset of papilledema and may 
reflect the accommodative capacity of the retrobulbar space. This was demonstrated in a 
study by Hansen et al., in which isolated human optic nerves preparations obtained from 
autopsies were submitted to predefined pressure alterations, and consecutive changes in 
ONSD were measured by B-scan ultrasound under defined conditions. It should be noted 
that papilledema can only develop when there is patency of the SAS surrounding the 
optic nerve. 
 
In normal adults, the average length of the optic nerve is about 40 mm, and its average 
diameter, including the nerve sheath, is about 4 mm. Without the sheath the nerve has a 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
33 
 
diameter of approximately 3 mm. This suggests that under normal conditions a minute 
total volume of CSF fluid is contained along the entire length of the optic nerve. 
 
In another study on postmortem optic nerves from subjects without ocular disease, Killer 
et al.[62] concluded that “…the optic nerve cannot be regarded as merely a homogeneous 
space filled with cerebrospinal fluid, but rather a tubular, multi-chambered space 
subdivided by a distensible blind end (cul de sac) behind the ocular globe” (Figure 19). 
Structurally, the immediate retrobulbar space is more distensible due to the absence of 
pillars and septae found in the less distensible intraorbital and cannallicular portions of 
the optic nerve sheath. These features are believed to be important for pressure 
homeostasis. This arrangement facilitates the flow of CSF within the optic nerve SAS 
allowing a build-up of physiologic pressure within the retrobulbar space thereby 
facilitating periodic reverse flow and thus circulation of CSF. If the ICP rises because of 
an increase of cerebrospinal fluid, the pressure gradient will point unidirectionally from 
the chiasmal cistern to the subarachnoid space of the optic nerve in the manner of a 
hydraulic pump, building up pressure in the small compartment that ends blindly behind 
the globe. Liu and Kahn have raised the doubt as to whether or not the pressure in the 
subarachnoid space can indeed be expected to be equivalent to the pressure in the 
ventricles, the cisterns, and the cranial subarachnoid spaces. Measurements made by Liu 
revealed decreasing pressure along the optic nerve SAS in a proximal to distal direction 
[63]. 
 
            
 
 
 
 
An important question is the relationship between the increase in ICP and the degree of 
distention of the ONS. Hansen and Helmke performed a study in twelve patients 
undergoing neurological testing that involved CSF absorption [64]. The ONS diameter 
was evaluated by serial B-mode ultrasound scans of the anterior optic nerve near its entry 
into the globe. The linear relationship between ONS diameter and ICP was only present 
within a certain CSF pressure interval. This interval differed between patients. ONS 
dilation commenced at pressure thresholds between 15 mm Hg (20.4 cm H2O) and 30 
mm Hg (40.8 cm H2O) and, in some patients, saturation of the response (constant ONS 
Figure 19: Schematic drawing 
of the optic nerve demonstrating 
the microanatomy of the ONS 
complex. Reproduced from Killer 
HE, and others [62] with 
permission from BMJ Publishing 
Group Ltd. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
34 
 
diameter) occurred between 30 mm Hg (40.8 cm H2O) and 40 mm Hg (54.4 cm H2O). 
Because of the variable pressure-diameter relationship, at higher CSF pressure levels the 
ONS may lose its ability for further dilation. Trabecular fibers and sheath collagen 
structure may determine this aspect of the sheath response. In Hansen‟s study, this certain 
threshold CSF pressure was, on average, 22 mm Hg (30 cm H2O) in all patients. The 
largest diameters were observed in the subgroup with the highest ICP readings (6.5 mm 
ONS diameter equivalent to 30 to 55 mm Hg ICP or 40.8 to 74.8 cm H2O). 
 
Thus, the clinical relevance of this study relies on the demonstration of pathologically 
enlarged sheaths or ongoing enlargement on serial ultrasonography studies. The point at 
which the ONS loses its capacity to distend would be the saturation level at which the 
other papilledema-like features begin to manifest. Therefore, identifying the saturation 
level in astronauts might be of critical importance. 
 
In their more recent work, Hansen et al. [65] showed that prolonged dysregulation of ICP 
led to persisting dilatation of the CSF compartment surrounding the optic nerve. As with 
any nonelastic behavior, ONSD returned to baseline only when SAS pressures did not 
exceed 35 mm Hg (47.5 cm H2O). When decompression occurred from higher pressure 
levels (45 mm Hg or 61.2 cm H2O and above), a clear residual dilatation remained (above 
0.34 mm). In conclusion, there is a limited capability for retraction of the optic nerve 
sheath after pressure normalization, similar to a behavior known as „hysteresis‟ (a time 
lag in the occurrence of two associated phenomena, as between cause and effect). When 
plastical deformation or trabecular damage-like over distension occurs, a pressure-
dependent structural remodeling in the trabecular tissue and ⁄or the dural elements takes 
place, reducing the retraction of the ONS to baseline levels when pressures are elevated 
above a certain threshold value and length of time. According to this study, direct 
correlation between distension and pressure exists for pressure values between 5 and 45 
mm Hg (6.8 to 61.2 cm H2O). Occupational surveillance analysis of the ISS astronauts 
who received ultrasound assessment of their ONSD revealed that VIIP cases had 
significantly greater ONSD (6.4 mm) compared to noncases (5.3 mm) P < .02. When the 
groups were examined for the number of days spent in microgravity before their ISS 
flight, the VIIP cases had more exposure compared to none among the noncases. 
Specifically, of the noncases, 57% had not flown before. Of the remaining noncases, 29% 
had short-duration flights and 14% had long-duration flight experience. Of the cases, 
31% had not flown before while 53% had short-duration flights and 15% had long-
duration flight experience. Therefore, the cases may have experienced elevated ICP on 
past missions, to the degree that the ONSD did not return to its original caliber. The 
difference in ONSD between cases (6.9 mm) and noncases (5.4 mm) persisted in flight, 
and was significantly different, P < .01. The cases also demonstrated a significant rise in 
ONSD from preflight to in flight P < .05, and from in flight to postflight, P < .03. The 
noncases did not show a significant change from preflight to in flight or postflight (Figure 
20). 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
35 
 
 
 
Figure 20: ONSD (in cm) in astronauts: VIIP cases versus noncases preflight/in-flight/postflight. Data 
from the NASA Lifetime Surveillance of Astronaut Health (LSAH).   
 
c) Choroidal folds and hyperopic shift can be associated with papilledema and are discussed 
in detail below. 
d) Other features that may present with papilledema include disc elevation in cases of more 
advanced disc swelling and hemorrhages. Asymptomatic papilledema at presentation is 
not uncommon. 
In summary, development of papilledema apparently depends on increased pressure in the distal 
optic nerve sheath, decreased perfusion of the axons exiting through the LC, and, possibly, 
elevated central retinal venous pressure. 
 
i) 
The Choroid and Choroidal Folds 
Choroidal folds involve Bruch‟s membrane and the adjacent retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) 
while the overlying retina is not involved, which explains the absence of visual symptoms in the 
presence of choroidal folds. Any factor causing congestion within the choroicapillaris will lead 
to folding.  
 
In a microgravity KC-135 parabolic flight experiment, choroidal blood flow increased 75%, 
while choroidal blood volume increased 100% during simulated microgravity compared with the 
baseline measures (1 G) [66]. It is hypothesized that the choroidal engorgement may be 
responsible for anterior displacement of the macula, contributing to the hyperopic shift. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
36 
 
 
If the retrobulbar pressure becomes elevated beyond physiologic levels, the pressure exerted may 
compress the posterior globe causing posterior sclera flattening thereby moving the macula 
anteriorly. Hence, posterior globe, or sclera flattening may be a secondary mechanism 
contributing to the hyperopic shift. Scleral flattening may also contribute to choroidal fold 
development by decreasing the available surface area supporting the choroidal vasculature. As a 
consequence, the choroidal vessels become compressed, precipitating folding.   
 
In some cases of idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH), choroidal folds have been found to 
precede the development of papilledema. In others, choroidal folds have been the only presenting 
sign of raised ICP from any source (that is, pseudotumor cerebri, venous sinus thrombosis, or 
intracranial mass). This suggests that either: 1) elevated intrasheath pressure and indentation of 
the globe, or 2) elevated venous pressures transmitted to the choroid; may cause choroidal folds 
before the onset of papilledema. It may be possible that variation of elastic properties of the 
sclera in different individuals could have some influence on how readily globe flattening occurs. 
Raised ICP may cause retrolaminar ONS enlargement and posterior globe flattening without 
causing obvious ONH swelling, if the critical pressure required to cause axoplasmic stasis within 
the individual is not reached. Figure 21 is a detailed schematic of the ocular anatomy for 
reference. 
 
The notion of inter-individual variability of the elastic properties of the ONS has been 
demonstrated by Hansen et al. [65], while Lavinsky et al. [67] showed variability among subjects 
in scleral rigidity as a determinant of the visible effects of the transmission of an increased ICP 
to the globe. In their study, they described the most frequent sonographic findings in IIH cases: 
flattening of the posterior ocular wall, thickening of the retinochoroid layer, and distension of the 
ONS. It is likely that in some individuals, retrobulbar pressure becomes great enough to cause 
some globe flattening, but, not so high as to cause axoplasmic stasis (choroid is engorged due to 
ICP elevation, but the sheath and lamina are flexible enough that axonal compression does not 
block axoplasmic flow and cause swelling and disc edema). 
 
 
 
Figure 21: Vascular anatomy of 
the eye. Reproduced from Anand-
Apte B, and others. [68] with 
permission of Elsevier. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
37 
 
j) 
Biomechanical Modeling of the ONH and ONS 
Strain is a measure of the local deformation in a material or tissue induced by an applied stress, 
and is usually expressed as the percentage change in length of the original geometry. Stress is a 
measure of the load applied to, transmitted through, or carried by a material or tissue, and can be 
defined as the amount of force applied to a tissue divided by the cross-sectional area over which 
it acts. It is important to recognize that strain, unlike stress, may be observed and measured and it 
is strain, not stress, which causes damage to tissues [69]. Stiffness is a composite measure of the 
entire structure‟s resistance to deformation that incorporates both the material properties and 
geometry of a complex load bearing system.  In the posterior pole of the eye, both the geometry 
and material properties of the sclera and LC contribute to their structural stiffness, and hence 
determine the ability of the ONH and peripapillary sclera to withstand strain when exposed to 
IOP or ICP. The ONH biomechanics are therefore determined by the geometry (size and shape of 
the scleral canal, scleral thickness, regional laminar density, and collagen beam orientation) and 
the material properties (stiffness) of the LC and sclera. As a consequence, eyes with identical 
IOPs may exhibit very different strain fields due to differences in their structural stiffness [70]. 
 
Three tissue types are found in the ONH [70]: load-bearing connective tissues of the 
peripapillary structures (sclera, scleral canal wall, and LC), axonal tissues (retinal ganglion cell 
axons), and cellular elements (astrocytes, glial cells, endothelial cells, and pericytes along with 
their basement membranes). 
 
When mechanical failure of the load-bearing connective tissues of the ONH occurs, then 
progressive damage to the adjacent axons (with eventual retinal ganglion cell death) ensues from 
a combination of both compressive and ischemic mechanisms. The stress generates strain (tissue 
deformation in response to load) within the tissues that experience the load. The magnitude of 
strain is based on the material properties of the tissues, including how well the tissues are able to 
resist deformations induced by the applied stress. 
 
Inter-individual variation in peripapillary scleral thickness can result in significantly different 
biomechanical responses to IOP. The principal load bearing tissue of the eye is the sclera, 
mostly, the peripapillary area. According to a study by Norman et al. [71], thickness over the 
whole sclera was 670 +/- 80 µm (mean SD; range: 564 µm to 832 µm) over the 11 eyes studied. 
Maximum thickness occurred at the posterior pole of the eye, with mean thickness of 996 +/- 181 
µm. Thickness decreased to a minimum at the equator, where a mean thickness of 491 +/- 91 µm 
was measured. Eyes with a reported history of glaucoma were found to have longer axial length, 
smaller ONH canal dimensions and thinner posterior sclera. The posterior radius had a smaller 
but still significant effect, suggesting that the shape of the posterior of the eye can alter its 
biomechanical response. The positive correlation of increased posterior radius with increased 
strain and displacement suggests that a flatter posterior sclera (that is, one with lower curvature) 
may lead to higher biomechanical loads in the ONH.  
 
Finite element modeling for a range of normal and elevated IOPs predicted that strains in the LC 
were more dependent on scleral stiffness, scleral thickness, and scleral canal diameter than on 
LC stiffness and optic cup shape [72]. The fact that neural tissue is two orders of magnitude 
more compliant than the sclera is consistent with the expectation that neural tissue is unlikely to 
bear significant load. Mechanical modeling of the LC is complex because it is a composite of 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
38 
 
connective tissue with pores through which glial cells and nerve fibers pass. This modeling 
suggests that average laminar strains depend more on scleral compliance than on laminar 
compliance.  
 
The five input factors that had the largest influence across all outcome measures were, in ranked 
order: stiffness of the sclera, radius of the eye, stiffness of the LC, IOP, and thickness of the 
scleral shell [60]. Their modeling predictions indicate that scleral properties have the largest 
effect when the sclera is more compliant. Increased scleral compliance occurs, for example, in 
myopia, either because of scleral thinning or due to alterations to the scleral extracellular matrix, 
which could help explain the higher incidence of glaucomatous optic nerve damage in highly 
myopic eyes at a given IOP. 
 
Downs et al. [69] considered a physiologic level of strain in the sclera to be between 0% and 1% 
and suggested that levels above 3.5% could be pathophysiologic, because they result in 
detectable changes in scleral material properties (stiffening). Slightly higher strain levels (5% to 
6%) have been observed to be the threshold for axonal injury [73]. Axons are damaged through a 
variety of mechanisms: either external compression by intact laminar beams, spontaneous 
compression (in which differences in tissue pressure across the lamina cause axons to collapse 
spontaneously), and both acute and chronic ischemia. Because the sclera is the stiffest ONH 
tissue, it supports much of the overall load. In particular, the peripapillary sclera must support 
relatively high stresses, which are compounded by peripapillary scleral thinning. Scleral thinning 
confers a biomechanical disadvantage, because it produces higher strains in the LC.  
 
k) 
Lamina Cribrosa (LC) 
 
The LC is a lattice-like structure, consisting of successive perforated cribriform plates across the 
optic nerve canal, through which pass bundles of nerve fibers. The plates are lined by basement 
membranes and their cores are filled with significant amounts of fibrillar collagens and elastic 
fibers. All of the axons passing through the LC depend on slow and fast axoplasmic transport for 
viability and synapse production. The main functions of the LC are to allow the retinal ganglion 
cell axons and the central retinal vein to leave the eye, to allow the central retinal artery to enter 
the intraocular space, and to stabilize the IOP by forming a barrier between the intraocular space 
and the extraocular space (Figure 22).  
 
Because of its barrier function, the LC prevents major leakage of aqueous humor from the 
intravitreal space into the retrobulbar cerebrospinal fluid space surrounding the retrobulbar part 
of the optic nerve. Because the LC forms the border between the intraocular space with a higher 
pressure and the retrobulbar space with a lower pressure, a pressure gradient exists across the LC 
as the difference in IOP minus pressure in the retrobulbar cerebrospinal fluid space. 
 
During aging, the constituents of these cribriform plates are altered including an increase in 
nonenzymatic glycation, a process that weakens collagen; in addition, there are changes in the 
amounts of types I, III, and IV collagen [74, 75]. Such changes alter the mechanical behavior of 
the aging LC and therefore compromise its ability to support the nerve axons that pass through it. 
Albon et al. [76] noted that the reversibility of the LC towards its original volume upon reduction 
of pressure, decreased with age, which indicated a decrease in resilience. These alterations in 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
39 
 
mechanical properties of the aging LC are likely to influence the susceptibility of the retinal 
ganglion cell axons to damage due to the close anatomical arrangement of the cribriform plates 
and the nerve axons that pass through them. In a young eye, the stress exerted on the nerve axons 
during the compression and rearrangement of the cribriform plates may be effectively much less 
than in the more rigid structure of the elderly LC. The change in mechanical compliance appears 
to be most marked after 40 to 50 years, the age at which the incidence of primary open angle 
glaucoma (POAG) is increased. This corresponds with the age range for astronauts affected with 
the VIIP syndrome. 
 
Simple considerations of the eye as a pressurized globe show that the stress in any part of the 
ocular shell, including the LC, is related to both IOP and the radius of the structure; ó = PR/2t, 
where ó = circumferential stress, P = IOP, R = radius of curvature at that part of the globe and t = 
thickness. Thus in large eyes or when the LC is cupped (that is, in glaucoma or the elderly), the 
effective radius of the entire pressure vessel is greater at this point, and therefore the stress is 
greater. This places myopic individuals at greater risk for glaucomatous damage. 
 
The LC shows regional variations. Pore size increases with increasing distance from the center of 
the LC (Figure 22B); the largest pores are located close to the lamina margin, with the least 
amount of inner pore connective tissue in the inferior, superior, and temporal disc regions, and 
higher retinal nerve fiber count in the inferior and superior disc regions. The structurally weaker 
areas of the LC correspond with the appearance of RNFL thickening in astronauts seen most 
prominently in the superior and inferior portions of the optic disc followed by the temporal 
region.  
 
  
 
 
Figure 22: A. Optic nerve and ONH X-Section.  Reprodued with permission from Vaughan DW [77].  B. Anterior 
view LC.  C. Arrangement LC plates and axonal passage. B and C - Reproduced from Burgoyne CF, et al. [59], 
with permission of Pergamon, obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
(1) 
The Translaminar Pressure (TLP) Gradient 
In a 1-G environment under normal physiologic conditions, the difference between IOP and the 
retrolaminar cerebrospinal fluid pressure is the TLP gradient that generates both a net posterior 
force on the surface of the LC and a hydrostatic pressure gradient within the neural and 
connective tissues of the prelaminar and laminar regions.  
 
In a modeling experiment, Bellezza et al. [70] found that maximum LC insertion zone stresses 
are approximately twice the magnitude of peripapillary scleral stresses in each of three ocular 
models, and are also influenced by changes in canal geometry, inner canal radius, and scleral 
A 
B 
C 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
40 
 
wall thickness. Progression of the neuropathy within an individual ONH is very much influenced 
by the physiologic age of the tissues in which it occurs. Once the load-bearing connective tissues 
are damaged, further damage to the connective tissues themselves and damage to the adjacent 
axons and living cells can be expected to occur. Burgoyne et al. [59] reported that once the load-
bearing connective tissues are physically damaged, secondary pressure-related damage to axons 
would be expected to occur at lower levels of IOP. When individual connective tissue trabeculae 
of the anterior LC mechanically fail, the load they were supporting is transferred to the 
immediately adjacent trabeculae thus increasing their load for the same level of IOP. Hence, 
even under a constant level of IOP, the adjacent laminar trabeculae progressively fail as the same 
level of overall IOP-induced load is spread over a continually decreasing cross-sectional area of 
connective tissue. More trabeculae increasingly fail, and increased pressure is exerted on the 
ones that remain. 
 
Axonal damage occurs by these main mechanisms: 
(1) axonal ischemia through the traditional vascular hypothesis (acute compressive effects on 
laminar capillary volume flow within the LC, which decreases axonal viability because of 
inadequate delivery of nutrients, secondary to reduced laminar capillary volume flow) 
[78] 
(2) physical compression of the axons secondary to the deformation of intact laminar 
trabeculae (the traditional mechanical hypothesis) [78] 
(3) spontaneous axonal compression secondary to tissue pressure differences across the intact 
LC (Yablonski‟s theory of spontaneous axonal compression) [79] 
 
Overall, connective tissue strain within the LC has both direct and indirect effects on axonal 
nutrition. Axonal ischemia can be the result of either IOP-induced occlusion of the laminar 
capillaries (direct effect) or decreased diffusion of nutrients (indirect effect), or both.  
 
In a study by Yan et al. [80], it was observed that most of the posterior displacement due to 
pressure elevation occurred within the peripheral areas of the LC. Yan found that deformation of 
the LC by elevated IOP stresses were maximal at the periphery and minimal at the centre of the 
ONH, owing to the greater curvature at the periphery, which is more prominent in myopic eyes. 
This is also consistent with a mechanical model in which shear forces within the LC dominate 
compressive or tensile stresses. Shear stresses are maximal at the border between the sclera and 
the LC, and decrease as moving away from the scleral boundary until they are negligible at the 
centre of the LC, consistent with clinically observed patterns of visual field loss in glaucoma 
(Figure 23). In highly myopic eyes, the LC is significantly thinner than in nonhighly myopic 
eyes, which decreases the distance between the intraocular space and the cerebrospinal fluid 
space and steepens the TLP gradient at a given IOP. This may imply that in highly myopic eyes, 
clinically, the target IOP may be set at a lower level than in emmetropic eyes. The periphery of 
the ONH was the region with the shortest distance between the intraocular space and the 
cerebrospinal fluid space. Jonas et al. [52] also suggested that a short distance between the 
cerebrospinal fluid space and the intraocular space steepens the pressure gradient and that a steep 
pressure gradient increases the susceptibility of optic nerve fibers to glaucoma. One may infer 
that optic nerve fibers located in the optic disc periphery would be more susceptible to glaucoma 
than fibers running through the optic-disc center. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
41 
 
 
 
           A 
 
 
 
 
 
      B 
Figure 23: A. ONH cross section, high shear stress at arrows. B. Schematic showing greater shear stress at 
periphery of LC. Reproduced from Yan DB, et al. [80] with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.  
 
 
l) 
Altered IOP/ICP Relationship: A Precipitant of Optic-Disc Edema? 
 
In healthy individuals, normal mean IOP is 16 mm Hg (22 cm H2O). The normal mean ICP in 
the recumbent position is 15 cm H2O (11 mm Hg). On average, there is a small pressure gradient 
(mean 5 mm Hg) directed posteriorly across the LC in normal eyes. The TLP gradient increases 
with elevation of IOP or reduction of ICP. The distance through which the TLP difference is 
exerted becomes critically important. While the thickness of the normal-LC is around 450 µm, 
the LC is thinner (or becomes thinner) in glaucomatous eyes or myopic eyes. 
 
Reducing ICP could have the same effect as increasing the IOP for the development of 
glaucoma, which in effect is altering the TLP gradient. This has been demonstrated by Yablonski 
et al. [79] using a cat model. ICP was decreased to 3.7 mm Hg (5 cm H2O) below the 
atmospheric pressure by cannulation of the cisterna magna. The IOP of one eye was reduced to 
slightly above atmospheric pressure by cannulation of the anterior chamber, whereas the other 
eye was left unchanged. After 3 weeks, the ONHs of the eyes, in which the IOP was unaltered 
and therefore had a higher TLP gradient, showed typical features of glaucomatous optic 
neuropathy. In contrast, in the eyes in which the IOP was also lowered, thereby maintaining a 
normal TLP gradient, no ONH changes occurred. The authors hypothesized that reducing ICP 
would have the same effect as increasing the IOP for the development of glaucoma. This 
underscores the importance of the TLP gradient as a source of axonal damage.  
 
In a recent series of human studies [58, 81], differences in ICP among subjects have been found 
to alter the TLP gradient and are correlated with visual field loss even in subjects with normal 
IOP (Figure 24). This relationship may have a primary role in the etiology of the VIIP ocular 
symptoms of spaceflight. In a prospective study, Berdahl et al. [58] reported that ICP is lower in 
patients with glaucoma and normal-tension glaucoma (9.1 mmHg or 12.4 cm H2O and 8.7 
mmHg or 11.8 cm H2O, respectively, versus ICP in nonglaucoma subjects, 11.8 mm Hg or 16 
H2O). Conversely, ICP appears to be elevated in patients with ocular hypertension (12.6 mm Hg 
or 17 H2O versus 10.6 mm Hg or 14.4 cm H2O in healthy individuals). In a prospective study by 
Ren et al. [81], the extent of glaucomatous visual field loss was positively correlated with the 
trans-LC pressure difference (Table 2). A surprising finding was the lower than average ICP in 
the normal pressure glaucoma patients, those with normal IOP. Thus, their reduced ICP resulted 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
42 
 
in an abnormal TLP gradient and resultant visual field loss. In the more typical high pressure 
glaucoma patients an elevated TLP is to be expected due to the high IOP, however, a lower than 
expected ICP also contributed to the increased TLP gradient. 
 
 
Figure 24: Amount of glaucomatous visual field defect correlated positively with the TLP pressure difference (P < 
0.005) r = 0.69. Reproduced from Ren R, et al. [81], with permission from Elsevier, obtained via Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
 
Table 2: The Extent of Glaucomatous Visual Field Loss was Negatively Correlated with CSF Pressure and 
Positively Correlated with the TLP Difference. Reproduced from Ren R, et al. [81], with permission from Elsevier, 
obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
Measure (pressure in mm Hg) 
Control group 
(N = 71) 
Normal Pressure 
Glaucoma(N = 14) 
High Pressure 
Glaucoma(N = 29) 
IOP 
14.3 +/- 2.6 
16.1 +/- 1.9 
24.3 +/- 3.2 
CSFp (ICP) 
12.9 +/- 1.9 
9.5 +/-2.2 
11.7 +/-2.7 
TLP Difference 
1.4 +/-1.7 
6.6 +/-3.6 
12.5 +/-4.1 
 
 
The central role that CSF pressure plays in the TLP gradient has been investigated by Morgan et 
al. [22, 23, 82] with in vivo measurements using a dog model. It was found that cerebrospinal 
fluid pressure largely determines the retrolaminar tissue pressure, that is, the retrobulbar 
pressure. Hence, along with IOP, CSF pressure is of major importance in setting the translaminar 
tissue pressure gradient (TLPG). Furthermore, Morgan showed that there is a strong linear 
correlation between the TLP gradient and the difference between IOP and CSF pressure (CSFp), 
when CSFp is 0 mm Hg or higher (Figure 25). 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
43 
 
 
Figure 25: A. Correlation of CSF pressure with RLT gradient. Reproduced from Morgan WH, Yu DY, Cooper RL, 
et al. [80], with permission of The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology. B. Correlation of IOP-
CSFp with TLP gradient.Reproduced from Morgan WH, Yu DY, Alder VA, et al. [23], with permission of The 
Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology. 
 
Optic nerve axons experience an abrupt pressure change as they leave the eye at the level of the 
LC. A pressure gradient, if present, will induce mechanical stress transverse to the pressure 
gradient (LaPlace's Law). Determinants of the TLP gradient are IOP, retrolaminar tissue pressure 
(ICP), and the axial thickness of the LC. Although peripheral nerves can withstand very high 
absolute pressures of up to 3800 mm Hg, pressure gradients are poorly tolerated. For instance, a 
gradient as low as 4.5 mm Hg/100 μm will reduce axonal transport [58]. Mechanical forces 
applied to nerves are known to cause ischemia and cytoskeletal disruption in association with 
axonal transport inhibition. Within the LC, the axonal cytoskeleton is subject to the pressure 
gradient, which may be increased in regions adjacent to the LC connective tissue beams. 
 
Morgan et al. [22] also found that for a given degree of pressure change, an increase in CSF 
pressure resulted in larger changes in ONH disc displacement than a corresponding increase in 
IOP and that most displacement occurred at low TLP differences, with little extra movement at 
TLP differences higher than 15 mm Hg or 20.4 cm H2O (Figure 26). 
 
 
A 
B 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
44 
 
 
Figure 26: ONH disc depth displacement as a function of TLP difference. Reproduced from Morgan WH, Chauhan 
BC, Yu D, et al. [22], with permission of The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology. 
 
Large movements of the central and deepest parts of the LC were seen with some small areas 
moving more than 128 μm with an increase in CSF pressure of only 2 mm Hg (2.7 cm H2O), or a 
decrease in IOP of only 5 mm Hg. Small increases in CSF pressure had a much greater effect 
than equivalent increases in IOP. This maximum displacement was stable at TLP differences 
greater than 15 mm Hg (20.4 cm H2O). This would suggest that at pressure differences of more 
than 15 mm Hg (20.4 cm H2O), almost no further posterior laminar movement occurred. This 
nonlinearity is consistent with the known nonlinear stress–strain relation of collagen, whereby 
the change in strain decreases with increasing stress. 
 
What does all of this mean for astronauts and the spaceflight VIIP syndrome? If one reverses the 
pressure relationship in glaucoma (IOP>ICP), the result is papilledema (ICP>IOP). And, if the 
TLP gradient determines the degree of axonal damage, it stands to reason that any increase in 
ICP (as is hypothesized to occur in the VIIP syndrome), and any decrease in IOP would 
exacerbate the TLP gradient and the expectation would be increased severity of VIIP. 
Interestingly, recent occupational surveillance work has revealed that IOP declines in ISS 
astronauts from preflight to postflight on average 1mmHg for both VIIP cases and noncases. 
Further analysis of the data is needed because of the small sample size and the unclassified cases. 
However, VIIP cases have a preflight IOP that is 1 mm Hg less than noncases. Furthermore, their 
postflight IOP is also 1 mm Hg lower than noncases (Figure 27). These data should be taken with 
caution when one considers that an IOP difference of 1 mm Hg is within the typical error of 
measurement (1.5 mm Hg) and the sample size is small.  
 
NASA‟s Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) for the VIIP syndrome, which is elaborated on in 
section VI of this report, divides cases into class 0 through 4, with class 4 being the most severe. 
When the IOP of the CPG VIIP cases is examined more closely, the most severely affected cases 
in CPG class 3 and 4 exhibit the lowest IOPs, both preflight (mean value of 13.2 mm Hg), as 
well as postflight (mean value of 11.8 mm Hg) (Figure 28). They also exhibit the greatest drop in 
IOP from preflight to postflight, nearly 50% more than any other classification. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition to the aquired globe flattening seen in the documented cases (a known correlate with 
increased ICP in IIH patients), several of the astronauts diagnosed with the VIIP syndrome have 
also been found to have optic-disc protrusion on MRI analysis. This is suggestive of a pressure 
12
13
14
15
16
Pre
Post
prepost
Not confirmed
Confirmed CPG Case
IOP
8
10
12
14
16
18
Pre-Flight
 
Post-Flight
 
cpg=0
cpg=1
cpg=2
cpg=3
cpg=4
Estimated  IOP Scores Pre & Post-Flight
IOP mm Hg 
Estimated IOP Scores 
Figure 27: Preflight 
and postflight IOP in 
VIIP cases and 
noncases. 
Figure 28: Preflight 
and Postflight IOP in 
CPG-defined VIIP 
cases versus 
noncases. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
46 
 
differential where ICP is greater than IOP. The characteristic feature is shown in astronaut 
ultrasound and MRI images presented in an earlier section of this document (Figures 5 and 9). 
 
In a recent clinical study using OCT, Kupersmith et al. [83] found that papilledema with raised 
ICP in patients with IIH resulted in an inward bowing of the retinal pigmented epithelium and 
basement membrane (RPE/BM), reflecting deformation of the underlying LC in response to a 
TLP gradient favoring ICP over IOP. This study confirms the animal work of Morgan et al. and 
demonstrates, in human subjects, an association between an elevated ICP/IOP gradient, 
papilledema and anterior displacement of the RPE/BM angle in severe cases of disc edema. 
Kupersmith et al. [83] prospectively examined 30 eyes with papilledema. The angle of the 
RPE/BM in the peripapillary retina furthest from the ONH and the altered border adjacent to the 
neural canal opening NCO was measured on the nasal and temporal sides of the optic nerve 
(Figure 29). 
 
 
Figure 29: RPE/BM angle measurement: red line denotes angular deflection from blue baseline indicating positive 
or anterior protrusion of ONH. Note inward bowing of the sclera (short arrows). Image adapted from Kupersmith 
MJ, Sibony P, Mandel G, et al. [83], with permission of The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology. 
 
The relative RPE/BM angulation inward, or towards the vitreous of the globe, was measured as a 
positive angle, and outward was measured as a negative angle. For each eye, the angulation was 
considered positive if there was > 5 degrees inward angulation, and deemed negative if less than 
or equal to 5 degrees. Positive angulation of the RPE/BM borders was found in 20/30 eyes (67%) 
among 10 of the 15 patients with papilledema. Notably, no patient had an IOP > 20 mm Hg. 
Mean inward RPE/BM angle was +1.5 degrees temporally and +2.5 degrees (SD 1.8 degrees) 
nasally. For individual patients with papilledema, positive angulation was correlated with RNFL 
thickness. For all 30 papilledema eyes, the amount of change in the nasal RPE/BM angle 
correlated with the change in average RNFL (Spearman r = 0.63, P = 0.01), but no such 
correlation was seen at the temporal angle (r = 0.13, P = 0.51). Notably, when medical therapy 
failed to decrease ICP and relieve papilledema, surgical optic nerve fenestration was performed 
(incision of the optic nerve sheath to release CSF pressure) that resulted in a decrease in 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
47 
 
papilledema and RNFL thickening (Figure 30). Such a finding supports the role of onboard OCT 
as a means to monitor VIIP severity in astronauts via regular assessment of RNFL.  
 
 
 
m) 
Manipulation of ICP and IOP to Prevent Optic-Disc Edema and Visual Loss 
 
Potentially, one could utilize the TLP gradient to guide treatment of optic-disc edema, by 
monitoring and modulating IOP and ICP. Pharmaceutical treatments aimed at ICP and IOP could 
rebalance the TLP gradient thereby reversing axonal compression and edema formation. 
However, at present there is no validated method of noninvasively measuring ICP during flight. 
 
 
In summary, changes in ocular system structure and function that have been documented to 
occur as a result of space flight include, choroidal folds, cotton wool spots, scotomas, hyperopic 
shifts, RNFL thickening, retinal hemorrhage, globe flattening,  optic nerve sheath distention and 
optic-disc edema. Notably, the latter three findings: globe flattening,  optic nerve sheath 
distention and optic-disc edema have documented associations  with elevated ICP.  Data 
collected during short-duration space flight has shown that IOP increases by 20-114% in the first 
hour of spaceflight, decreases to preflight values for the duration of the flight thereafter, and then 
decreases to below baseline values postflight. IOP from long-duration spaceflight is being 
collected, but there are insufficient data points at present to allow a meaningful analysis. 
Evidence from parabolic flight includes an increase of 5-7 mmHg in IOP, while evidence from 
bed rest studies shows an almost immediate rise in IOP with horizontal and head-down tilt (6, 7, 
10, and 15 degrees), and lower than baseline IOP upon rising from prolonged head-down 
position, Bed rest has also been shown to cause a decrease in visual acuity, an increase in 
subfoveal choroidal thickness, and hyperopic shifts.   
Figure 30: Positive RPE angle 
associated with RNFL thickening. 
Note, upon relief of CSF pressure 
via optic nerve fenestration, RPE 
angle and RNFL thickness 
decreased. Reproduced from 
Kupersmith MJ, Sibony P, Mandel 
G, and others [83] with 
permission of The Association for 
Research in Vision and 
Ophthalmology. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
48 
 
2. 
Spaceflight-Induced Cardiovascular Adaptations 
 
In this section several hypothesized cardiovascular system contributors to the development of 
spaceflight-induced visual impairment and potential interactions with IOP are discussed (Figure 
31). Outlined are known, investigated, and hypothesized effects of spaceflight on the 
cardiovascular system in the hopes that this review will elucidate the relationship among these 
spaceflight-induced adaptations and their influences upon the changes in vision impairment and 
IOP in astronauts during and after exposure to weightlessness. 
 
 
Figure 31: Known, investigated, and hypothesized cardiovascular contributions to vision impairment, ICP and 
IOP in microgravity. 
 
In a review of the astronaut cases, Mader et al. [1] extensively discussed a number of hypotheses 
that might explain changes in vision during microgravity exposure but, in general, did not 
emphasize the potential role of elevated ICPs. While acknowledging that the cephalad-fluid shift 
may result in venous congestion, as observed from jugular vein distension [84-86], and facilitate 
increasing ICPs, they outlined arguments against the development of intracranial hypertension 
and the potential role it might have. Perhaps the most compelling arguments were that no 
classical clinical symptoms of intracranial hypertension were reported (such as, chronic 
headaches, diplopia, transient visual obscurations, pulse synchronous tinnitus), and the degree of 
Cardiovascular Contributions to Vision Impairment 
and Intracranial Pressure in Microgravity  
Microgravity 
Cephalad Fluid Shift 
CVP 
Lymphatic 
Flow 
Vascular 
Response 
Transcapillary 
Fluid Pressures 
Venous 
Congestion 
 Intracranial 
Pressure ? 
Intraocular 
Pressure 
Visual Acuity 
? 
? 
Other Effects 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
49 
 
ocular manifestations were disproportionate to the borderline elevated measures of ICPs 
available in these cases. Additionally, it is hard to directly ascribe the changes in vision to an 
increase in ICP as there currently are no in-flight measures of ICP that temporally correspond to 
the onset of symptoms; all lumbar punctures were performed after landing. However, Mader et 
al. [1] suggest that changes in vision and ocular structures with spaceflight might be related to 
altered IOPs. 
a) 
Spaceflight-Induced Fluid Shift 
Spaceflight is known to cause a cephalad-fluid shift secondary to the loss of the hydrostatic 
pressure gradient normally experienced on Earth. Moore and Thornton suggest a 2000 mL shift 
from the legs to the upper body [87]. Ground-based analogs of spaceflight, such as head-out 
water immersion and head-down bed rest, suggest that the fluid shift is between 700 to 3000 mL 
[87-89]. This fluid shift leads to transient increases in stroke volume [90, 91] and cardiac output 
[92] and possibly increases in ICP and IOP [40]. It is likely that there is significant variability 
across astronauts in the type and volume of the fluid shift experienced in spaceflight [89]. While 
fluid shift seen in bed rest results in a reflex diuresis, the mechanisms of fluid redistribution are 
far less clear during spaceflight [93]. 
 
It is clear that the distribution of fluids in the body is influenced by the direction and magnitude 
of gravity and the resulting hydrostatic gradients. On Earth, standing up from a supine position in 
a gravity field imposes a substantial challenge to the human cardiovascular system. Due to the 
increase in hydrostatic pressure gradient acting along the length of the body, venous volume 
increases by approximately 500 mL [94]. This redistribution of fluid from the central circulation 
is immediately detected by baroreceptors (pressure) and, in time, by volume (osmolarity) 
receptors, activating reflex responses to increase heart rate, contractility, and vascular resistance 
to maintain blood pressure. When astronauts enter the microgravity environment of spaceflight, 
the opposite effect occurs. It has been well documented that microgravity leads to a cephalad-
fluid shift in the absence of the hydrostatic pressure gradient [86, 87, 95-97]. 
 
One of the first physiologic changes noted during the Apollo program was the decrease in 
plasma volume, exhibited by the decrease in weight of the crewmen [98]. It was initially 
hypothesized that this decrease in plasma volume was a reflex response to a cephalad-fluid shift, 
although the etiology of this plasma volume decrement was never clearly characterized. 
Although the time course of the plasma volume losses was unknown due to the lack of in-flight 
measurements, the degree of plasma volume loss was independent of the duration of the Apollo 
mission [98]. 
 
Initially, the cephalad-fluid shift upon entry into microgravity was documented using 
anthropometric measures. Pre and postflight anthropometric measures were easily obtained by 
astronauts and flight surgeons, but the surgeons lacked the ability to distinguish between changes 
in fluid status and tissue loss. It was assumed that the rapid recovery of anthropometric measures 
postflight represented fluid shifts and plasma volume recovery, while the more gradual recovery 
was the result of lean tissue and fat mass accretion. For example, 16 of 24 Apollo astronauts had 
a decreased calf circumference after spaceflight, which amounted to a mean decrease of 3% 
immediately postflight that was not fully restored 5 days later, indicating that this loss was a 
combination of fluid and muscle atrophy [99]. In the last two Apollo missions, leg volume was 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
50 
 
reduced by 6% post-landing and did not change appreciably over the next 90 to 160 hours after 
splashdown. Similar results were obtained in the three U.S. astronauts participating in the 
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [100]. 
 
Anthropometric observations made during the Skylab 2 and 3 missions demonstrated a decrease 
in thigh circumference suggesting that these astronauts experienced a significant fluid shift and 
muscle atrophy during the course of their missions. More extensive circumferential measures 
were obtained during Skylab 4 [86], when it was found that astronauts experience a rapid loss in 
leg volume early during their flight, too rapid to be explained by fat or lean tissue loss, but the 
change was consistent with the cephalic fluid shift that occurs during spaceflight. These 
measures were performed every 3 cm along the leg and the arm, around the neck, chest, 
abdomen, and hip (Figure 32). 
 
 
 
Figure 32: Circumference measures used to calculate volume of fluid shift during Skylab 4 [86].  
 
 
Interestingly, there was little to no change in arm volume in these subjects from pre to in flight 
and from in to postflight, suggesting that neither arm fluid volume nor tissue volume changed 
during the course of their mission (Figure 33). Furthermore, they noted lower limb veins were 
not distended, while the veins of the upper body, including the jugular, temple and forehead 
veins were completely full and distended. They concluded that intra and extravascular fluid shifts 
to above heart level had occurred and hypothesized that increased transmural pressure led to 
cephalad edema (puffy face).  
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
51 
 
 
 
 
. 
Anthropometric measurements of the thigh and calf also were obtained in eleven astronauts 
during and after five early Shuttle flights (STS-7, 8, 51D, 51B, 61B) using stocking 
plethysmography [86, 87] (Figure 34). As expected, upon entry into microgravity, leg volume 
decreased by 11.6% and was explained by the authors to result from a rapid shift in fluid volume 
to the upper body, which could be seen in photographs of puffy faces, and reports of nasal 
congestion and „full headedness‟. The total fluid shift was measured to be 2 L, 1 L from each leg, 
with the majority of the volume coming from the thigh, not the calf. The majority of this fluid 
Figure 33: Volume changes pre, in, and 
postflight from Skylab 4 [86] 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
52 
 
shift occurred in the first 6 to 10 hours after entering microgravity, with a subsequent slow 
negative decline or plateau. Similar to observations after Skylab missions, when measurements 
were repeated within 1.5 hours of landing with the astronauts standing, the difference between 
pre and postflight leg volume was less than in flight, amounting to only an average decrease in 
leg volume of 4%. The decreased volume upon landing was likely the combined result of lower 
plasma volume, decreased fat mass, and lower muscle mass. As in Skylab, 1 week after Shuttle 
landing, leg volume had recovered somewhat towards the preflight value; leg volume was 3% 
lower than preflight at this time when plasma volume would have been recovered. Using a 
similar method, Kas‟ian et al. [95] measured leg changes on two cosmonauts during the 120-day 
Salyut-6 mission. They noted a decrease in leg volume of 6% to 7% within the first week of 
flight in both cosmonauts, which continued to decrease to 18% to 23% reduced leg volume by 
flight day 120. The absence of postflight tests makes interpretation of these volume changes 
difficult, as it is unclear how much of the volume loss was due to muscle atrophy from 
hypokinesia.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 34: Schematic of leg plethysmograph and Dr. William Thornton making measurements on Commander 
Richard Truly on STS-8. Reproduced from Moore TP, et al. [87] with permission of the Aerospace Medical 
Association. 
 
Kirsch et al. [96] were able to use A-mode ultrasound to quantitate the spaceflight-induced fluid 
shift in one cosmonaut on the Mir 1992 mission. Interstitial thickness measures over the forehead 
and tibia were used to quantify the hydration or dehydration preflight (supine and head-down), 
eight times during flight and after 7 days of flight. Facial tissues swelled during the first 3 days 
but then may have been impacted by a lower body negative pressure session on day 4 of this 
mission. Tibial interstitial thickness was reduced by 20% and remained low for the duration of 
the flight and immediately upon landing as well. Body weight did not fully recover within the 
first 4 days after landing, suggesting that only a portion of the interstitial thickness changes were 
fluid dependant.  
 
 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
53 
 
b) 
Plasma Volume Losses 
It is well documented that plasma volume decreases with spaceflight [93, 101-103] although the 
exact mechanism of this plasma volume decrease is not completely understood. Red cell mass is 
decreased in spaceflight [103-105] appropriately as a reflex response to hemoconcentration after 
reduced plasma volume. Leach and coworkers initially reported that total body water is 
decreased after short-duration Shuttle flights [106] yet suggested that this number may have been 
enhanced by a space motion sickness-induced reduction in water intake. Several years later, they 
published the results of SLS-1 and SLS-2 studies in which they measured plasma volume, total 
body water, and extra and intracellular fluid volumes in seven astronauts. In this report, Leach 
and coworkers reported that plasma and extracellular fluid volume were decreased, while total 
body water was unchanged, suggesting that the intracellular fluid volume was increased. This 
reduction occurred despite no report of natriuresis or diuresis, similar to results from Drummer et 
al. [107]. It is generally accepted that diuresis is not the cause of reduced plasma volume during 
spaceflight, but rather a combination of decreased water balance (that is reduced intake) and 
extravasation into intracellular and interstitial compartments [108]. Leach et al. [93] reported a 
negative water balance and reduced total circulating protein in the astronauts. They suggest that a 
rapid filtration of protein out of the vascular space is responsible for the early plasma volume 
loss and a negative water balance perpetuates this hypovolemia. Norsk also reported that a 
negative water balance exists in spaceflight and is more pronounced than that seen in bed rest 
[109]. In his review of Shuttle, Mir, and bed rest data, he reports that intravenous infusion of 
isotonic saline resulted in an attenuated diuresis compared to bed rest. Similarly, oral water load 
during a Mir mission resulted in an attenuated diuresis compared to an identical oral water load 
in bed rest. 
  
c) 
Central Venous Pressure (CVP) 
In the early days of the Shuttle era, the spaceflight-induced cephalad-fluid shift was well-known 
and assumed to cause an increase in CVP. Norsk et al. [110] measured CVP in 14 subjects while 
seated upright during parabolic flight and determined only a slight (1.8 mm Hg) increase in CVP 
during short periods of weightlessness. When seven subjects were studied in a separate parabolic 
flight study in which CVP was measured in the supine posture, Foldager and coworkers reported 
a decrease from 6.5 +/- 1.3 to 5.0 +/- 1.3 mm Hg during weightlessness [111]. They were also 
able to measure CVP in one Spacelab D-2 astronaut, and concluded that CVP in microgravity is 
close to or below measured values in 1g, supine position. Earlier, Kirsch and co-workers 
measured peripheral venous pressure in four Spacelab 1 astronauts and suggested that these 
measures would be analogous to central venous pressure[112]. All four astronauts were reported 
to have reductions in venous pressure measures; however, only data for two of the astronauts 
were reported. One astronaut was reported to experience a reduction in CVP from 9.5 cm H2O (7 
mm Hg) on the day before flight to 6.5 and 2.6 cm H2O (4.8 and 2 mm Hg) on the first and sixth 
days of flight, respectively. CVP in a second astronaut was reduced from 15.2 cm H2O ( 11.2 
mm Hg) on the day before flight to 6.5 and 7.7 cm H2O (4.8 and 5.7 mm Hg) on days 1 and 6 of 
flight, respectively [112]. These findings were supported by two separate studies by Buckey et 
al. [113, 114]. The first report was from a Spacelab Life Sciences (SLS-1) flight in which CVP 
was measured preflight while seated and while in the launch position in the orbiter, during 
launch and during the initial moments upon reaching microgravity. CVP was elevated from 5 to 
6 cm H2O (3.7 to 4.4 mm Hg) while seated to 10 to 12 cm H2O (7.4 to 8.8 mm Hg) in the launch 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
54 
 
position. It increased further during the launch, presumably from the Gx forces, to 15 to 17 cm 
H2O (11 to 12.5 mm Hg) before decreasing to 0 to minus 3 cm H2O (0 to minus 2.2 mm Hg) 
upon entering microgravity. This reduction was rapid, occurring during the first minute of 
microgravity, and remained within 1 to 2 cm H2O (0.7 to 1.4 mm Hg) until the catheter was 
removed [113]. This was one of the first reports to refute the hypothesis that CVP increased with 
the cephalad-fluid shift experienced in microgravity. Interestingly, heart size in this astronaut 
increased at the same time that CVP decreased. In a second report of two SLS-2 crewmembers, 
similar results were obtained [114]. Mean CVP (two SLS-2 crewmembers and one SLS-1 
crewmember) increased from 8.4 cm H2O (6.2 mm Hg) preflight to 15 cm H2O (11 mm Hg) in 
the launch position to 2.5 cm H2O (1.8 mm Hg) after 10 minutes in microgravity (Figure 35). 
They further reported that cardiac filling was increased, despite the reduction in CVP, 
hypothesizing that effective filling pressure was elevated due to the reduced transmural pressure 
applied from the lungs and abdominal organs in microgravity.  
 
Despite a decrease in central venous pressure, elevated filling pressure may impede the emptying 
of the large thoracic veins, such as the jugular and superior vena cava. Herault et al. [85] reported 
significant engorgement of the jugular and femoral veins during spaceflight. Arbeille and 
coworkers examined both lower and upper body veins during bed rest and long-duration 
spaceflight [115]. During bed rest, only the jugular vein was distended, while the femoral vein 
was smaller. During spaceflight; however, both veins were distended upon exposure to 
microgravity and remained distended by as much as 40% after 6 months of spaceflight (Figure 
36). Arbeille suggests that the marked enlargement of the jugular vein may be indicative of blood 
pooling in the brain [115]. This study highlights an important deficiency of HDT bed rest as an 
analog of spaceflight. Despite the cephalad-fluid shift in bed rest, hydrostatic pressure tissue 
gradients still exist, which explain the divergent femoral vein responses in Arbeille‟s study. 
Spaceflight causes more than a fluid shift due to the removal of the Gz hydrostatic gradient. 
Removal of all gravitational gradients results in a fluid shift and a response to the fluid shift that 
is unique to the microgravity environment. 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
55 
 
 
Figure 35: CVP tracing from two SLS-2 astronauts showing the decrease in CVP upon exposure to microgravity 
8.5 minutes post-launch. Reproduced from Buckey JC Jr, et al. [114] with permission from The American 
Physiological Society, obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.  
 
 
Videbaek and coworkers tested this hypothesis by measuring central venous pressure, esophageal 
pressure (EP – a surrogate of intrathoracic pressure) and atrial distension in seven men during 
parabolic flight [116]. The CVP decreased during the microgravity period of parabolic flight 
from 5.8 +/- 1.5 to 4.5 +/- 1.1 mm Hg and esophageal pressure decreased from 1.5 +/0- 1.6 to -
4.1 +/- 1.7 mm Hg. Left atrial diameter increased from 26.8 +/- 1.2 mm to 30.4 +/- 0.7 mm. 
Despite the decrease in CVP, the left atrial filling pressure was elevated (as demonstrated by left 
atrial distension). Videbaek suggests that the difference in CVP and EP results in an increased 
„transmural‟ central venous pressure, which explains the increased cardiac filling despite the 
reduced CVP. Furthermore, they report increased left ventricular end diastolic volume, stroke 
volume, and cardiac output, likely the result of the chest wall changing shape and expanding in 
the absence of gravity. White and Blomqvist used a three-compartment cardiovascular model to 
simulate the relaxation of the chest in microgravity [117]. Their results indicate that this would 
increase the transmural filling pressure of the heart, increase left ventricular end diastolic 
volume, stroke volume, and cardiac output, similar to the results obtained by Videbaek in 
parabolic flight. Prisk et al. [118] also reported elevated stroke volume and cardiac output in four 
SLS-1 astronauts. In their report of pulmonary diffusing capacity, they also suggest that 
improved membrane diffusing capacity is a function of microgravity-induced mechanical 
changes in pulmonary blood flow and not an adaptive response.  
 
These data regarding CVP have been collected and evaluated largely in the context of cardiac 
filling and the progression of post-spaceflight orthostatic intolerance. It is important to point out 
that the apparent disagreement in the field regarding the effects of microgravity on CVP may 
largely be perceptual. While changes in transmural pressure will have a significant effect on 
venous return and thus cardiac output, it is far less clear if there would be any effect on venous or 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
56 
 
lymphatic drainage from the head. This is due to the fact that driving pressures are thought not to 
change in microgravity as both sides of the vascular tree are influenced by gravity. It may be that 
peripheral venous pressures in the neck will provide more applicable information regarding 
blood and lymph drainage. 
 
d) 
Transcapillary Fluid Pressure  
In support of the many anecdotal reports of puffy faces, sinus congestion, and feeling of a full 
head during spaceflight, Kirsch et al. [96] were one of the first to clearly show interstitial 
swelling in the forehead during flight. However, there is little spaceflight evidence of filtration 
into the extravascular space in the head and neck. Using a ground-based analog of 10-degree 
HDT, Diridollou and coworkers [119], showed that after 24 hours, subjects presented with a 
similar forehead interstitial swelling to that seen by Kirsch [96]. Linnarsson et al. [120] using 
tetrapolar bioimpedance, measured segmental fluid shifts during 7-degree HDT bed rest. The 
authors suggest that the initial interstitial swelling is a result of a rapid blood shift, which is 
detected as a plasma volume expansion and is followed by a more gradual extravascular shift 
from the legs over the course of 2 hours. Bioimpedance detected extravascular volume leaving 
the thigh and the calf, but not entering the chest, suggesting that this volume was being absorbed 
into the vascular space. This would result transiently in decreased plasma oncotic pressure. This 
is supported by a study by Hsieh et al. [121] who reported an initial decreased oncotic pressure in 
the time frame reported by Linnarsson [120], but ultimately resulting in an elevated colloid 
osmotic pressure. Similarly, Parazynski et al. [122] reported an initial decrease in colloid oncotic 
pressure from 21.5 +/- 1.5 mm Hg to 18.1 +/- 1.9 mm Hg within the first 4 hours of HDT. They 
suggest that this decrease in plasma oncotic pressure is a result of the change from filtration to 
absorption in the capillary beds below the heart. This colloid oncotic pressure is thought to 
gradually return to baseline and is described by the Starling-Landis equation  
 
The Starling-Landis equation describes fluid movement in the microvasculature: 
 
                        
 
                       
                            
                             
                                
                          
                               
                                  
 
Fluid movement into or out of the capillaries is dependent on the hydrostatic pressure drop (Pc – 
Pi) minus the colloid osmotic pressure drop (πc – πi). The filtration coefficient (Kf) takes into 
account the permeability of the capillary membranes to water that is dependent on surface area 
and hydrostatic conductance. The reflection coefficient (σ) is used to correct for the fact that not 
all plasma proteins are effective in retaining water, and is different in various vascular beds.  
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
57 
 
Parazynski et al., were the first to quantify all four Starling-Landis pressures during HDT [122]. 
They measured upper body capillary and interstitial fluid pressures, as well as plasma and tissue 
oncotic pressures in seven men during 8 hours of 6-degree HDT. Capillary fluid pressure 
increased from  
27.7 +/- 1.5 mmHg to 33.9 +/- 1.7 mm Hg at the end of bed rest, while interstitial fluid pressure 
did not significantly change (Figure 36). Although plasma oncotic pressure initially decreased, it 
returned to baseline by the end of 8 hours of bed rest. Subcutaneous and intramuscular colloid 
osmotic pressure in the face and neck did not change. Parazynski and coworkers suggest that the 
significantly elevated net Transcapillary pressure gradient in the head and neck is the reason for 
cephalic edema during bed rest and spaceflight. They further suggest that capillaries above the 
heart may be more permeable to protein filtration than those below the heart, similar to the report 
by Leach et al. [93]. Hargens measured interstitial pressure in the lower leg muscles and 
subcutaneous tissues and reported a decrease in tissue pressure of 7.4 and 4.4 mm Hg, 
respectively [123]. He also hypothesized that lower leg vascular absorption results in decreased 
vascular oncotic pressure and, coupled with increased cephalic capillary pressure, results in 
filtration in the upper body. Several years later, in a separate review, Hargens further postulated 
that the reduced tissue weight in microgravity results in lower interstitial fluid pressure, further 
shifting the Starling balance to net filtration during spaceflight [124]. 
 
 
 
Figure 36: Capillary (left) and interstitial fluid pressure (right) during 8 hours of HDT bed rest. Capillary 
pressure is significantly elevated and interstitial fluid pressure does not significantly change. Reproduced from 
Parazynski SE, et al. [122] with permission from The American Physiological Society, obtained via Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc.  
 
Cephalad edema may further be exacerbated in spaceflight by changes in microvascular water 
permeability. In a lumped parameter cardiovascular model, Lakin et al. [125] postulated that 
cerebral fluid filtration is increased if the space between endothelial cells of the cerebral blood 
vessels is increased. This would be possible in spaceflight if the gravity-induced hydrostatic 
pressure gradients in the cerebral interstitium were removed. They also suggest that radiation 
exposure during spaceflight may alter endothelial protein structure such that cells shrink, 
increasing permeability between cell junctions. Christ et al. [126] showed that fluid filtration 
capacity (capillary permeability) is increased during long-duration bed rest, and this may be 
enhance in the presence of free O2 radicals and activated leukocytes, such as during exposure to 
spaceflight radiation and other oxidative stressors.  
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
58 
 
Diedrich et al. [127] nicely summarizes the current model of spaceflight-induced fluid volume 
changes (Figure 37). Exposure to microgravity causes a cephalad-fluid shift secondary to the 
removal of the hydrostatic pressure gradient. Central venous pressure is reduced due to 
expansion of the chest and decreased pressure from tissue and organs. This reduction in tissue 
compression likely plays a role in extravasation of fluid, resulting in overall reduced plasma 
volume and cephalic edema. 
 
 
 
Figure 37: Flow diagram of predicted blood and fluid volume changes during spaceflight. Reproduced from 
Diedrich A, et al. [127] with permission of Wolters Kluwer Health, obtained via RightsLink. 
 
 
e) 
Venous Distension 
Arbeille and coworkers examined both lower and upper body veins during HDT bed rest [115] 
(Figure 38). Spaceflight causes more of a fluid shift due to the removal of the Gz hydrostatic 
gradient. Removal of all gravitational gradients results in a fluid shift and a response to the fluid 
shift that is unique to the microgravity environment.  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
59 
 
 
 
 
f) 
Vascular Adaptations to Spaceflight 
Normal blood vessel function is necessary for sustaining and adapting to the metabolic demands 
of individual organs. To meet the blood flow requirements of organs and local tissue beds, 
arteries and veins must be able to respond rapidly to diverse physical and chemical signals by 
changing either vessel caliber (diameter) or altering the density of the vascular network. Several 
factors regulate how vessels respond to modifications in demand including humoral, neural, and 
autoregulatory. Importantly, changes to any of these systems such as in response to chronic 
activation from environmental stimuli or injury may result in impaired vascular control and 
contribute to numerous pathologies. 
 
Medical data from as early as the Mercury and Gemini missions indicate that exposure to 
microgravity results in cardiovascular deconditioning presenting as orthostatic intolerance upon 
return to Earth's gravity [128]. While many researchers agree that the space-related 
deconditioning is likely triggered by a headward fluid shift and a reduced plasma volume, a 
preponderance of evidence indicates that the loss of vascular control, indicated by lower 
peripheral resistance and increased blood pooling in the lower limbs, is a primary mechanism for 
postflight orthostatic hypotension and is independent of volume status [101, 102, 129-132]. For 
example, flight data from both Buckey [101] and Fritsch-Yelle et al. [131] demonstrated that 
astronauts who finished a postflight stand test, compared to those who became presyncopal, had 
a significantly greater vasoconstrictor response with higher total peripheral resistance. Fritsch-
Yelle et al. suggested that the lower level of peripheral resistance, associated with an increased 
incidence of postflight orthostatic hypotension, is likely due to decreased circulating levels of 
norepinephrine and is less likely related to volume status as there were no differences in plasma 
volume levels between presyncopal and nonpresyncopal subjects. Ground-based studies using 
HDT bed rest to simulate microgravity overwhelmingly confirm a significant relation between 
Figure 38: Divergent vein diameter 
responses between HDT bed rest (panel A) 
and spaceflight (panel B). The panels show 
percentage change of the preflight values, 
measured at 1h, and days 4-5, 7, 15, 21, 28 
and 42 during HDT, and at days 1 and 2-4, 
weeks 1 and 2-3, and months 3 and 5-6 
during spaceflight. The jugular vein is 
distended in both real and simulated 
microgravity, while the femoral vein is only 
distended in real microgravity. Ajv - Jugular 
vein cross-sectional area. Afv - Femoral vein 
cross sectional area. * P<0.05, significantly 
different from preflight or pre-HDT values. 
Reproduced from Arbeille P, and others [115] 
with permission of Springer-Verlag, obtained 
via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.  
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
60 
 
orthostatic intolerance and a decreased vasoconstrictor response that is evidenced by increased 
lower limb venous compliance [133-136].  
 
Along similar lines of thought, differences between astronauts who become presyncopal and 
those that are nonpresyncopal on landing day may provide additional insight into the effects of 
spaceflight that might contribute to in-flight vision changes. Specifically, Tuday et al. [137] 
observed that although vascular compliance, calculated as stroke volume divided by pulse 
pressure, was not different between the astronaut groups before flight, vascular compliance was 
lower in the nonpresyncopal astronauts than in the presyncopal astronauts on landing day. 
Perhaps increased stiffness may reflect remodeling of the vascular wall, including increased 
collagen: elastin ratio, collagen cross-linking, and modifications of the vascular matrix. Although 
this response to spaceflight may be to protect against postflight orthostatic intolerance, assuming 
that the decrease in vascular compliance is similar across all vessels in the body, then perhaps 
these observed changes may be suggestive of changes in the cerebrovasculature. However, using 
the hind-limb suspension model in rats, Tuday et al. [137] provided some of the first ground-
based experimental evidence demonstrating that a reduction in large artery hydrostatic forces 
results in greater vessel distention and is accompanied by an impaired vasoconstrictor response 
to the sympathetic neurotransmitter norepinephrine. Since then, considerable attention has been 
focused on understanding the mechanisms that underlie many of the microgravity-induced 
vascular adaptations in relation to orthostatic intolerance. Much of this data has recently been 
reviewed in-depth by Zhang, who reported that changes in arterial compliance were a local effect 
resulting from regional changes in blood pressures. A number of other probable explanations 
may include, a reduced adrenergic receptor sensitivity [138], less vasoconstrictor reserve [139, 
140], and an enhanced flow-dependent vasodilator response [141]. 
 
The effects of gender on postflight orthostatic tolerance, or the ability to regulate blood pressure 
during standing or upright tilt, may be of interest in the investigation of VIIP as men appear 
better able to maintain blood pressure during orthostatic challenges than women, and men also 
seem to be more susceptible to vision changes during long-duration spaceflight. However, as 
noted by Fritsch-Yelle et al. [131], differences in postflight orthostatic tolerance in the astronaut 
population may be the result of selection bias. That is, the large majority of astronauts who did 
not experience orthostatic intolerance on landing day were career military pilots or had high 
performance aircraft training [131, 142]. To further illustrate this potential bias, the study with 
the highest incidence of orthostatic intolerance also has the highest proportion of payload 
specialists [101]. 
 
g) 
Radiation Effects on Vascular Function 
 
Our present level of knowledge of the vascular effects of radiation, in particular space-like 
radiation, greatly lags that of the microgravity-related vascular alterations. Until recently, the 
majority of evidence suggesting radiation-induced changes in vascular function was 
substantiated only by epidemiologic studies such as those reporting data on cardiovascular 
disease rates in the Hiroshima/Nagasaki atomic bomb survivors [143] or the similar findings 
from the Chernobyl emergency workers [144]. The vascular effects of exposure to radiation are 
generally focused around cardiovascular disease formation, most notably atherothrombotic 
vascular disease. Unlike the deconditioning effects of microgravity, radiation is thought to 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
61 
 
produce damaging cellular effects either directly [145-147] or indirectly [148-151]. Aside from 
programmed cell death (apoptosis), several studies suggest that exposure to radiation impairs 
endothelial function shifting the regulatory balance towards increased vasoconstriction through 
impairment in the nitric oxide pathway [151-153]. While a healthy endothelium is primarily 
associated with maintaining normal vascular function through the production and secretion of 
several vasoactive substances such as nitric oxide, it also serves as a selective permeable barrier, 
regulating the exchange of fluids and blood constituents (such as plasma proteins and cells) 
between the circulation and the surrounding tissues. The impaired trafficking of substances from 
the intravascular space to the extracellular region could have significant implications on the 
delivery of nutrients and fluid distribution to surrounding tissues and organs. In addition, 
questions remain as to whether the combined vascular effects of exposure to microgravity and 
space-like radiation will be additive contributing to an even greater pathogenesis or whether the 
increase in vascular compliance resulting from the microgravity-induced deconditioning will be 
offset by the increase in vasoconstrictor tone due to impairment in the nitric oxide pathway. 
 
h) 
Microgravity Effects on Cerebral and Ocular Circulation Vascular Function 
 
Often overlooked, but critically important toward producing orthostatic intolerance is a decrease 
in cerebral perfusion. In general, cerebral blood flow is well protected against systemic changes 
in pressure or flow without compromising the high demands of brain tissue. However, with a 
reduction in central volume from both a decrease in plasma volume and blood pooling in the 
lower limbs, it is reasonable to assume that cerebral blood flow may be impacted after 
spaceflight. 
 
Blood flow to the brain is supplied by the two carotid and two vertebral arteries that 
communicate with each other through the arterial anastomoses that form the circle of Willis. 
Under normal conditions the circle of Willis acts only to communicate need and not as a central 
station where supply is mixed and then delivered to the smaller collateral circulations [154, 155]. 
Three pairs of arteries form the circle of Willis and feed specific regions of the brain, the 
anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries. Extending beyond the larger arteries are dense 
networks of capillaries where nutrient exchange takes place with a 2 to 3 fold greater density in 
the gray compared with white matter. The blood is collected and drained by two systems of 
veins, including the deep venous system within the brain and the internal jugular and other veins 
outside of the skull. Unique to the circulation within the skull is that it is tightly regulated by the 
blood-brain barrier and is therefore protected against ionic and humoral factors. The cerebral 
vasculature undergoes fine adjustments primarily through autoregulatory processes such that 
under normal healthy conditions on Earth, the cerebral blood vessels have an intrinsic ability to 
keep blood flow constant over a wide range of arterial blood pressure levels via myogenic, 
metabolic and tissue pressure mechanisms. 
 
Data indicate that upon entry into space, the mean arterial pressure in the head increases from 
approximately 70 mm Hg to 100 mm Hg. The higher cerebral perfusion pressure in turn leads to 
elevations in both cerebral artery and capillary blood flow which contributes to elevations in ICP 
[124]. It is widely held by some that the product of these microgravity-induced alterations in 
perfusion pressures and blood flow, and elevations in ICP over time contributes to pronounced 
changes in cerebral responsiveness [101]. However, a number of studies suggest that cerebral 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
62 
 
blood flow is lower in response to spaceflight and head-down bed rest [131, 156, 157]. 
Specifically Kawai et al. [156], demonstrated that after 24 hours of HDT bed rest peak cerebral 
blood flow velocity was significantly lower compared to before HDT and remained lower up to 6 
hours of recovery (Figure 39). These differences in the literature highlight the need for additional 
research in this area.   
 
 
 
Controversy exists as to whether regulation of blood flow is altered in response to stress (such as, 
going from a supine to a standing position) or whether the lower values are simply a factor of 
hypovolemia. Data against a change in regulation include that from Fritsch-Yelle et al. [131] 
who measured blood flow velocity in the middle cerebral artery using ultrasound and did not find 
a difference in tilt response between presyncopal and nonpresyncopal astronauts. In another 
study that measured cerebral blood flow, velocities and beat-to-beat changes in arterial pressure, 
it was found that after 16 days in space static autoregulation was not impaired and moreover 
dynamic regulation (changes occurring during stress) was actually improved [158]. Interestingly, 
Greaves et al. [159] also reported on improved autoregulation in a set of subjects who 
participated in 60 days of HDT bed rest. Taken together, these data and recent findings from 
Jeong and colleagues [160] suggest that autoregulation is in fact not impaired and that the 
alterations in blood flow after spaceflight are related to volume status . 
 
While the human data appear undisputable, evidence from several ground-based studies using 
the rat hind-limb tail suspension model suggests that the reduction in cerebral blood flow is 
associated with a decrease in autoregulation and that it is due to alterations in cerebral arterial 
structure and function. Indeed, data from Geary et al. [161] and Wilkerson et al. [162, 163] 
indicate that myogenic tone and vascular resistance is increased, and that the difference in tone 
(suspended versus control rats) is related to changes in nitric-oxide-mediated vasodilation. 
Interestingly, the overall functional consequence of increased tone appears to lead to reduced 
blood flow and the stimulus does not appear to be an increase in arterial pressure but rather 
increases in transmural pressure caused by the elevation in the extravascular pressure in the 
cranium [162]. 
Figure 39: The time course of mean cerebral 
blood flow velocity in subjects after 24-hours 
HDT bed rest. Reproduced from Kawai Y, and 
others [156] with permission from The 
American Physiological Society, obtained via 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
63 
 
 
However, as noted previously, data from similar investigations on cerebral autoregulation in 
human spaceflight do not corroborate the findings in the ground-based analogs. These data are in 
line with evidence from modeling steady-state ICP differences between HDT bed rest and long-
duration microgravity exposure [164]. It was concluded that ICP should be less in crew exposed 
to actual microgravity compared to subjects in long-term HDT [164]. The reason for the 
profound differences in findings between actual spaceflight and its analogs remains unclear; 
however, it has been speculated that the central volume shift in fluid, and subsequent 
redistribution of fluid between compartments and tissues, is not comparable. 
 
Evidence suggests that most spaceflight-related cardiovascular adaptations return to preflight 
values within 7 to 14 days of re-exposure to Earth‟s gravity. However, there are no surveillance 
data to confirm this. Moreover, no data exist that directly compare measures of cardiovascular 
regulation in astronauts who have participated in the ISS missions that may identify individuals 
at risk for visual disturbances after long-duration spaceflight. Towards this end, a retrospective 
analysis was performed on Medical Operation tilt/stand test data collected pre and immediately 
postflight on 20 astronauts that flew on both Shuttle and the ISS (Figure 40). It was found that 
pulse pressure most clearly differentiated the two mission types compared to other 
cardiovascular measures (for example, total peripheral resistance and stroke volume). Statistical 
analysis confirmed that mean pulse pressure across the first 5 minutes of the postural stress test 
was significantly higher before (45.6 [42.1 to 49.1] mm Hg) and after (50.7 [46.9 to 54.6] mm 
Hg) time on the ISS compared with their most recent Shuttle flight (31.6 [27.8 to 35.4] mm Hg, 
and 32.2 [28.3 to 36.0] mm Hg respectively), even after correcting for differences in age and 
cumulative number of mission hours. Examination of the relation between stroke volume and 
pulse pressure, an indicator of change in arterial compliance, demonstrated that the range of 
pulse pressures, for a similar change in stroke volume, was greater immediately after Shuttle 
flight (lower compliance) compared to before flight. Interestingly, the range of pulse pressure 
remained greater in astronauts (no difference in stroke volume) before their time on the ISS 
(Figure 41). These results suggest that measures of arterial compliance (the relation between 
stroke volume and pulse pressure) are lower after a Shuttle mission and do not resolve in 
astronauts who also participate in long-duration spaceflight and thus provide evidence for 
specific vascular changes that may contribute to alterations in cerebral blood flow and IOP that 
are thought to underlie changes in visual acuity after long-duration spaceflight. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
64 
 
 
 
 
Figure 41: Relation between stroke volume and arterial pulse pressure during the first 5 minutes of a tilt test in 
astronauts who flew both on the Shuttle (blue) and on the ISS (maroon) before flight (closed circles) and after flight 
(open circles) (N = 20). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 40: Arterial pulse pressure (mm 
Hg) during the first 5 minutes of a tilt test, 
before flight (closed circles) and after 
flight (open circles) in astronauts who 
flew both Shuttle (blue) and on the ISS 
(maroon). Pulse pressure was 
significantly higher (P + 0.009) before 
and after being on the ISS compared with 
before and after flying on Shuttle (N = 
20). 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
65 
 
i) 
Lymphatic Flow 
 
Perhaps the least well understood component of the vascular system in the human body is the 
lymphatics; this is especially true for lymphatic structure and function of the brain. In fact, the 
current understanding suggests that there are no organized lymphatic vessels draining the brain 
[165-167]. Fluid is believed to drain directly into the blood via arachnoid villi, [167, 168] flow 
down cranial nerves to collecting nodes [169] or follow blood vessels to collect in cervical 
lymph nodes (Figure 42) [166, 167]. It is not well documented which of these routes 
predominates in the human, as much of the work has been done in quadrapedal mammals, 
though it is likely that all three pathways play some role. What is striking about all three of these 
drainage pathways is the lack of an active pumping mechanism involved in bulk flow of lymph, 
unlike the lymphatic vasculature of other tissue beds. There are no lymphangions, no valves, and 
no pressure/flow sensitive pumping action. This makes the lymphatic drainage of the brain 
potentially more sensitive to the effects of gravity. Lymphatic drainage of the eye is also a matter 
of some disagreement, and the precise structures/routes taken by the lymph are not well 
characterized [170]. 
 
 
 
To our knowledge, no research exists on the effects of spaceflight on lymphatic drainage of the 
brain or eye. Only one well controlled study has been conducted on the effects of simulated 
microgravity on lymphatic contractile function [171]. These investigators used a rat hind-limb 
unloading model, a very common animal model for simulating the effects of spaceflight on the 
musculoskeletal system. Lymphatic vessels were studied from four different areas of the body; 
cervical, thorax, mesenteric, and femoral to sample vessels of different sizes and with different 
hemotologic conditions during tilt. The selection of the cervical lymphatics in this study is 
critical for our purposes, as both the brain and eye ultimately drain into the cervical lymph. After 
2 weeks of hind-limb unloading, inhibition of contraction frequency (cervical), ejection fraction 
(all) and fractional pump flow (Figure 43) were found in the lymphatics [88].  
 
Figure 42: Proposed perivascular drainage 
route of brain lymph. Reproduced from 
Weller RO, and others[167]  with permission 
of the World Federation of Neurology and 
Springer-Verlag, obtained via Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
66 
 
 
 
Figure 43: Effect of 14 days hind-limb unloading on the fractional pump flows of isolated lymphatic vessels from 
four different tissue beds. Reproduced from Gashev AA, et al. [171] with permission from The American 
Physiological Society via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
 
The degree of inhibition was dependent on the pressures and/or flows through the vessels. The 
authors concluded that simulated microgravity „profoundly‟ inhibited the active pumping of 
lymph in all four tissues. They further propose that this inhibition may contribute to the fluid 
redistribution seen during spaceflight. It is somewhat surprising that vessels from all four areas 
were affected in the same way. Studies of arterial vessels in rats [172] and humans, during bed 
rest [173] have shown that the vessels of the lower body and upper body react differently. 
 
3. 
Spaceflight-Induced Central Nervous System Adaptations 
 
The ocular changes documented in the astronauts affected by the VIIP syndrome may be due to 
the cephalad-fluid shift caused by spaceflight exposure and presumed, prolonged increase in ICP. 
The symptoms (choroidal folds, globe flattening, hyperopic shift, and optic-disc edema) seen in 
affected astronauts after long-duration spaceflight are similar to those seen in the terrestrial IIH 
condition [174]. It should be noted that the astronauts do not display all of the classic IIH 
symptoms such as chronic headaches, diplopia, transient visual obscurations, or pulse-
synchronous tinnitus. This section will give a brief overview of retrospective data analyzed as 
part of an occupational surveillance activity and hypothesized changes in the central nervous 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
67 
 
system as a result of long-duration spaceflight. As further data is collected, this section will be 
expanded to include additional information. 
a) 
Intracranial Pressure 
 
The pressure inside the rigid cranium, referred to as ICP, is determined by the sum of the 
intracranial constituents: the brain parenchyma, interstitial fluid, arterial blood, venous blood and 
CSF. Normal ICP ranges from 5 to 15 mm Hg (or 6.8-20.4 cm H2O) depending upon body 
position. The ICP is lower when standing due to the shift of fluids towards the feet and a 
decrease in intracranial mass as a result of a shift in venous blood and CSF out of the cranium. 
The ICP is higher when supine or lying down as venous blood and CSF shifts towards the head 
and inside the cranium leading to increased intracranial mass. Such changes underlie the 
relationship between pressure and density, where: 
 
ICP = sum density of intracranial contents (mass inside cranium/volume cranium) x 
volume cranium x acceleration/area cranium 
 
As volume and area of the cranium, as well as acceleration are constants, the changing mass 
within the cranium dictates changes in ICP as venous and CSF volume enters and exits the semi 
closed space. 
 
The pressure-volume relationship between ICP, volume of CSF, blood, and brain tissue, is 
known as the Monro-Kellie doctrine [175]. The cranium‟s constituents (blood, CSF, and brain 
tissue) maintain a homeostasis, such that any increase in volume of one of the cranial 
constituents must be compensated by a decrease in volume of another. However, there is a small 
buffering capacity for increases in intracranial volume (more appropriately referred to as 
intracranial mass) primarily by the volume of CSF and to a lesser extent, the volume of venous 
blood. These buffers respond to increases in volume of the remaining intracranial constituents. 
For example, in a head trauma patient with an expanding epidural hematoma the increased mass 
will be compensated by the displacement of CSF and venous blood out of the cranium [175]. For 
example, in a head trauma patient with an expanding epidural hematoma the increased mass will 
be compensated by the displacement of CSF and venous blood out of the cranium (Figure 44).    
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
68 
 
 
 
 
Fundamental changes in both vascular and interstitial fluid distribution occur upon exposure to 
microgravity. In a 1-G environment, acceleration due to gravity creates a downward force that 
acts on the body‟s fluids. As a consequence, a hydrostatic pressure gradient exists across the 
body‟s axis resulting in a higher pressure in the most dependant regions and lower pressure at the 
head. This is most evident in the standing position. For example, according to Hargens and 
Richardson [176] the arterial pressure in a standing male of average height is 200 mm Hg at the 
foot, while only 70 mm Hg at the head (Figure 45). The venous blood is also subject to the 
hydrostatic gradient. In fact, gravity assists cerebral venous drainage from the cranium, 
preventing cerebral venous congestion and elevations in ICP. Upon exposure to microgravity and 
loss of the hydrostatic gradient, there is a cephalad-fluid shift from the lower body on the order 
of 1-2 liters. Consequently, arterial pressure across the body‟s axis equalizes so that pressure at 
the foot and the head is 100 mm Hg. Such fluid shifts occur on a daily basis on Earth upon 
assuming a supine position during sleep. Vascular and interstitial fluid moves from the 
dependant regions to the abdomen, thorax, and head. Interestingly, Rowell [177] reported that 
arterial pressure was approximately 98 mm Hg at the foot, and 99 mm Hg at the head when 
supine. 
 
Figure 44: Diagram showing 
the small buffering capacity that 
allows for increases in 
intracranial volume. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
69 
 
 
 
Figure 45. Loss of hydrostatic pressure gradient drainage and cerebral venous congestion. Adapted from Hargens 
AR, et al. [176], with permission of Elsevier BV, obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
An indication of the changes that occur as a result of fluid shifts on central and cerebral 
hemodynamics in spaceflight may be illustrated by the terrestrial work of Chapman et al. [178] 
and Hirvonen et al. [179]. Chapman [178] instrumented a group of normal subjects with 
intraventricular catheters and measured ICP while tilting the subject‟s long axis at multiple tilt 
angles. Similarly, Hirvonen and Kauko [179] measured CVP in normal subjects at similar tilt 
angles. In the upright position (0 degree), ICP in a representative subject was found to be -2.3 
mm Hg (-3.1 cm H2O), while Hirvonen and Kauko found the CVP to be 0 mm Hg. In the supine 
position (90 degrees), ICP increased by 11.5 mm Hg (15.6 cm H2O) from -2.3 mm Hg (-3.1 cm 
H2O) to 9.2 mm Hg (12.5 cm H2O), correspondingly, CVP in the same position increased from 0 
to 5 mm Hg. When subjects were subjected to HDT (-30 degrees) ICP increased an additional 
14.8 mm Hg (20.1 cm H2O) from the supine position to 24.0 mm Hg (32.6 cm H2O), while CVP 
in a similarly tilted subjects increased to 9 mm Hg. These invasive experiments document the 
effect that cephalad-fluid shift has on raising CVP and ICP. In the case of ICP, the acute effect of 
cerebral venous engorgement is an increase in blood volume within the rigid cranium. As the 
cranium is nonexpansile, pressure increases modestly, and within the normal limits of ICP (10 to 
15mmHg or 13 to 20 cm H2O). However, in these experiments, subjects were tilted for brief 
periods lasting no longer than 5 to 15 minutes. In the case of the ISS astronauts, the fluid shift 
exposure is constant for approximately 180 days. 
 
Evidence suggests that changes in venous and interstitial fluid shifts may provide the largest 
contribution to potential increases in ICP during spaceflight. To gain a greater sense for the 
venous changes that occur, several terrestrial studies were reviewed. Gisolf et al. [180] noted that 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
70 
 
venous pressure at the head in the standing position could be assumed to be -20 mm Hg. It is 
well known that the right atrium of the heart represents the hydrostatic indifferent point for 
venous pressures in the upright human. Thus, as in the arterial system, pressures below the right 
atrium increase due to hydrostatic pressure, but above the right atrium venous pressures become 
increasingly negative in the standing position. Upon entry into microgravity however, the loss of 
the hydrostatic gradient results in a redistribution of venous pressures across the body‟s axis 
causing an increase in venous pressures above the right atrium in comparison to standing in 1 G. 
As described earlier, Hirvonen and Kauko [179] showed an increase in CVP with fluid shift from 
standing to supine in terrestrial subjects, and Gisolf et al. [180] reported an increase in venous 
pressures from standing to supine of approximately  
40 mm Hg from -20 mm Hg standing to 15 to 20 mm Hg supine. The shift in venous volume to 
the cranium is responsible for the acute change in ICP, as demonstrated by Chapman [178] and is 
illustrated by the equation for ICP: 
 
ICP=CSF out flow resistance x CSF formation+Superior Saggital Sinus Pressure  
 
Although increases in CSF outflow resistance will increase ICP, the most immediate increase 
will be venous volume shift into the dural venous sinuses. 
 
The data presented thus far is based upon ground studies examining positional fluid shifts. 
However, a series of rodent experiments by Gotoh [28, 181] using simulated microgravity is 
consistent with the proposed mechanisms for venous fluid shift and raised ICP in microgravity 
related VIIP. Gotoh et al. demonstrated that venous pressure at the jugular vein increased on 
average 1.3 mm Hg in seven rats during a 4.5 second drop test thereby demonstrating that by 
removing the force due to gravity, and the effect of hydrostatic cerebral venous drainage, the 
ensuing fluid shift causes venous pressure above the right atrium to increase. During the 
experiment, the rats were positioned in a 30-degree head up orientation. In an additional 
experiment, Gotoh et al. [182] measured ICP using a similar protocol, and found that ICP 
increased on average 2.5 mm Hg (3.4 cm H2O) during the 4.5-second drop test. This represents a 
near doubling of the rise in venous pressure and may be accounted for by the rigid cranium and 
intracranial contents that limit dural expansion and contribute to elevated pressures, unlike the 
jugular vein that has more compliance due to the lack of a rigid container. Notable in this 
experiment, it is the rapidity of the changes with the onset of microgravity and its limited 
duration of 4.5 seconds that precludes additional contributions to raised pressure from exhaustion 
of volume compensation due to shift of CSF into the spinal space, interstitial fluid shift, and 
congested lymphatics, all factors that would raise ICP further. 
 
Multiple effects are likely to occur as a result of acute cerebral venous congestion that may 
contribute to exacerbations in ICP elevation. CSF is produced at a constant rate and circulates 
throughout the ventricles of the CNS, the subarachnoid space, optic nerve sheath, and 
subarachnoid spinal space. CSF must be resorbed at a constant rate to prevent accumulation and 
increases in ICP. Invaginations into the dural venous sinuses from the subarachnoid space, called 
arachnoid granulations, allow CSF outflow by pressure-sensitive mechanisms related to 
hydrostatic gradients (directed from CSF to venous blood) and to active transport by arachnoidal 
cell pinocytotic (vesicular) mechanisms. The normal differential in the driving pressure is a ratio 
of 0.60 in favor of the CSF pressure. For example, in the supine position, CSF pressure may be 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
71 
 
10 to 12 mm Hg (13.6 to 16.3 cm H2O), while superior saggital sinus pressure may be 5 to 7 mm 
Hg yielding a driving pressure of 3 to 5 mm Hg for CSF reabsorption. Thus, an increase in the 
venous pressure of just a few mm Hg would alter the diffusion gradient significantly and inhibit 
CSF reabsorption. As a result of venous congestion and the associated increase in venous 
pressure, CSF resorption could be decreased causing a back-up of CSF. Especially with 
downstream lymphatic congestion, interstitial fluid drainage along blood vessels may be reduced 
resulting in an increase in brain interstitial fluid volume. Alterations in CSF production in the 
choroid plexus may also contribute to potential changes in ICP, particularly during the postflight 
period. 
 
According to the Starling-Landis equation, the fluid equilibrium between vessels and the 
interstitium is regulated by colloid osmotic pressures (in the plasma and the interstitial fluid), 
arterial blood pressure, interstitial fluid pressure, and capillary blood pressure [176]. There is a 
significant drop in the hydrostatic pressure from the capillaries to the venules, thus any increase 
in venous pressure due to venous congestion will increase transcapillary pressure and 
concomitant net permeation of fluid to the brain parenchyma (increased plasma from the vessels 
into the interstitium and decreased reabsorption into the capillary). The brain parenchyma swells, 
as occurs in high altitude brain edema [183], and in turn increases sinus venous pressure, both of 
which affect ICP. This phenomenon, according to the Starling-Landis concept, would take place 
under the assumption that the capillary bed of the blood-brain-barrier remains intact in 
microgravity. The integrity of the blood-brain barrier depends on the tightness of the endothelial 
cell-cell junctions in the walls of the intracranial capillary vessels (known as tight junctions). As 
Lakin et al. [125] explain, several components contribute to maintaining the tightness of these 
junctions on Earth. A major role is played by adhesion between the endothelial cells, and this 
component may or may not be affected by alterations in gravity. A study by Masseguin et al 
[77], examined (among other parameters) ultrastructural and functional measures of the tight 
junctions found between choroid plexus epithelial cells, in rats subjected to hindlimb suspension 
for 30 and 180 minutes. Study results demonstrated that tight junction structure and protein 
composition were unaltered (confirmed by freeze-fracture and conventional electron microscopy, 
and immunohistochemistry for typical tight junction proteins, respectively). Tight junction 
permeability was shown to be intact by injecting the rats with cytochrome C into the blood 
circulation, and then demonstrating that cytochrome C did not cross the blood-CSF barrier at the 
level of the choroid plexus. However, gravitational unloading of body tissues and fluids, one of 
the most pervasive changes caused by a microgravity environment, may have an ability to alter 
the integrity of the blood-brain barrier in other ways. In addition, as mentioned in a previous 
section of this evidence report, exposure to higher levels of radiation in space may also affect the 
biology of endothelial cells in a way that will reduce tightness. 
 
Another route for CSF resorption is via the cranial and spinal lymphatics. CSF travels via the 
perineural sheath of the olfactory nerve crossing the cribiform plate and is absorbed by the 
lymphatics of the submucosa in the olfactory and respiratory epithelium. In a similar fashion, 
lymphatics associated with spinal nerves absorb some CSF from the spinal subarachnoid space. 
CSF absorption values vary among different reports of animal experiments, with 13% to 80% of 
CSF being absorbed via the lymphatic system [184]. In addition to the cephalad shift in vascular 
fluid, there is also a head-ward shift in interstitial fluids from the dependant regions of the body. 
The elevated venous pressures, particularly in the face may also inhibit resorption of interstitial 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
72 
 
fluid as described previously thereby compounding facial edema a common complaint among 
astronauts in space.  
 
Within the premise of the involvement of venous congestion in determining ICP changes, MRI 
venography evaluation may provide some information about stenosis and compressing 
structures. Some potential compressive zones have also been proposed as possibly relevant in 
contributing to the venous congestion in microgravity [185].  
 
b) 
Intracranial Hypertension 
 
IIH, also known as pseudotumor cerebri, is a condition characterized by increased ICP without 
clinical, laboratory, or radiologic evidence of an intracranial space-occupying lesion, meningeal 
inflammation or venous outflow obstruction. This increased ICP can lead to optic disc swelling 
(papilledema) caused by high CSF pressure in the distal optic nerve sheath, elevation of the 
pressure in the central retinal vein, and impaired perfusion of the neurons as their axons traverse 
the LC [186]. 
 
Several MRI findings [29] have been found to be a common occurrence among IIH patients and 
VIIP cases (Table 3). A majority of imaging assessment parameters listed by Maralani et al. 
[187] have been reported in at least some of the VIIP cases, while others like stenosis score, were 
not clinically indicated and remain to be evaluated.   
 
Table 3: Comparison Table of MRI Findings in IIH Patients Compared to Those Identified in the VIIP Population 
 
MRI Signs of Elevated ICP: IIH versus VIIP 
Imaging Assessment 
Present in IIH (Specificity) 
Seen in VIIP 
Combined Stenosis Score 
100% 
Unknown 
Flattening of Posterior Globes 
100% 
Yes 
Tight Subarachnoid Space 
100% 
Unknown 
Partially Empty Sella Turcica 
95.3% 
Yes 
Optic Nerve Sheath Distension 
88.4% 
Yes 
Optic Nerve Tortuosity 
86% 
Yes 
Slit-like Ventricles 
79.1% 
Unknown 
 
 
The debate about the etiology of IIH or pseudotumor cerebri focuses on the role of elevated 
intracranial venous pressure. Bilateral transverse sinus (TS) narrowing in patients with IIH can 
be found regularly on MR imaging and may cause venous outflow obstruction.  Some patients 
benefit from stent treatment of these venous sinus obstructions; however, others do not. 
Restenosis of the TS after pressure reduction and repeated increase of ICP suggests that 
increased ICP may be the primary problem leading to compression of the venous sinus and not 
venous sinus stenosis leading to ICP. Consequently, venous sinus stenoses could be reduced or 
eliminated by CSF diversion procedures as shown in the case report [188] below (Figure 46). 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
73 
 
 
c) 
Increased CSF Production 
 
The choroid plexus, comprised of a rich capillary bed, pia mater, and choroid epithelial cells, is 
the primary producer of CSF and does so at a rate of 0.3 to 0.6 mL/min, generating a total 
volume of 500 to 600 mL of CSF daily [189]. However, the total volume of CSF in humans is 
estimated to be 150 to 270 mL, which demonstrates the high turnover of this fluid, completely 
replacing the CSF approximately every 8 hours [190]. Flow of CSF is pulsatile and the fluid 
courses from its origin at the choroid plexus to exit at the foramina of the fourth ventricle out to 
the basal cisterns, then flows into the spinal and cortical subarachnoid spaces. Recently a 
paradigm shift has occurred in the presumed path of CSF clearance. Previously, absorption by 
arachnoid granulations was considered the primary mechanism of CSF clearance, whereas newer 
data is more consistent with reabsorption after bulk flow convection across the cribriform plate 
and along the olfactory, optic, facial and vestibulocochlear cranial nerves [189, 191-196]. From 
the nerve sheaths, the CSF passes into the cervical lymphatic system and then drains into the 
venous blood. The arachnoid granulations are now thought to have a role in regulating CSF 
drainage in times of increased pressure [189, 197, 198]. The normal CSF pressure in humans is 
about 10 cm H2O, which is slightly higher than the venous pressure in the dural sinuses [189]. 
This pressure gradient drives the flow of CSF out of the brain toward reabsorption into the 
Figure 46: Reversibility of venous sinus 
obstruction with reduction of CSF pressure: case 
report. Adapted from Rohr A, et a.l [188], with 
permission of the American Society of 
Neuroradiology, obtained via Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc.  
A – ICP of 50 cm H2O, with bilateral stenosis of 
the transverse sinus 
B – After lumbar puncture with removal of CSF 
and resultant reduction in ICP 
C – After a second lumbar puncture  
D – After placement of a ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt for continuous CSF drainage and further 
ICP reduction.   
Stenoses in both the left and right transverse 
sinuses (LTS, RTS), as marked with arrows, are 
reduced in accordance with a lowered CSF 
pressure with complete resolution in C. Some 
residual narrowing is noted in the transverse 
sinuses in D, attributed to the relatively high 
opening pressure of the shunt valve. However, the 
vessels retained a greater degree of patency in 
comparison to the initial presentation  
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
74 
 
systemic vasculature. Although there is a good understanding of the mechanisms of CSF 
productions terrestrially, whether CSF production and/or outflow resistance increases and/or 
intracranial compliance decreases in microgravity is not known.  
 
Terrestrially, arterial hypertension has been documented to increase CSF production in a rodent 
model [199] and further research is needed to determine the contributions of arterial 
hypertension to the spaceflight VIIP syndrome. Alperin et al. (Figure 47) described the influence 
of increased CO2 levels (described in further detail later in the evidence report) on arterial 
hypertension and potentially ICP [200]. 
 
 
Figure 47: Normal ISS operating CO2 levels are 10 times greater than the levels seen on Earth [201] that may 
cause vasodilation, increased CSF production, and increased ICP levels. Adapted from Alperin NJ, et al. [200], 
with permission of the Radiological Society of North America. 
Animal studies, conducted by Tomassoni et al. (Figure 48), have shown that animals with arterial 
hypertension have an increased expression of Aquaporin 1 (AQP1) in the choroid plexus [202]. 
This increased AQP1 protein expression may lead to increase CSF production. Research 
conducted by Gabrion et al. used a rat model to evaluate choroidal cell responses to the 
spaceflight environment as compared to hind-limb unloading to simulate spaceflight-induced 
fluid shifts and ground controls [203]. The study data showed AQP1 membrane proteins were 
reduced 64% after 14 days of spaceflight and 44% and 68% in the hind-limb unloaded groups 
(14 and 28 days respectively). This decrease in AQP1 suggests an adaptation during spaceflight 
and hind-limb unloading that leads to a reduction in CSF secretory activity. Subsequently, upon 
readaptation, 2 days for spaceflight animals and 6 hours for hind-limb unloaded animals, AQP1 
expression was increased over controls (48% in spaceflight and 57% in 14-day hind-limb 
suspended animals), suggesting increased CSF production.   
 
Very limited astronaut data is available for evaluation, but the postflight MRI review of one 
long-duration astronaut measured the CSF production and flow through the aqueduct at 30 and 
180 days postflight (Kramer, unpublished data). Interestingly, the CSF production and peak 
velocity approximately doubled during the postflight period (at 30 days CSF production rate = 
305 µL/min and peak velocity = 3.65 cm/s; 180 days CSF production rate = 682 µL /min and 
peak velocity = 7.80 cm/s). Lumbar puncture was performed on this astronaut 57 days postflight 
with and opening pressure of 38.7 cm H2O  
(28.5 mm Hg). This leads to the hypothesis that there may be a new set-point for ICP during 
ICP (mm Hg) 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
75 
 
spaceflight that leads to increased CSF production via up-regulated AQP1 protein expression 
upon return to Earth. It should be noted that CSF production and flow were evaluated during the 
postflight period only on one astronaut and the animal experiments previously described were 
completed by 2 days post-readaptation, so additional data is required to further develop this 
hypothesis. 
 
An overproduction of CSF may contribute to the VIIP syndrome seen in astronauts. This could 
be caused secondary to the increase in blood flow to the choroid plexus caused by the fluid shift 
associated with spaceflight, or the vascular dilation associated with the higher CO2 levels that are 
tolerated on orbit. However, hypercapnia experiments producing an tripling of arterial pCO2 and 
arterial dilation in the CNS, led to a reduction rather than elevation in CSF production [204]. 
 
 
 
Figure 48: On the left – Aquaporin-1 membrane protein. Reproduced from Murata K, et al. [11], with permission 
of Nature Publishing Group, obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. On the right - Increased AQP1 
expression in the choroid plexus of animals with arterial hypertension. A – F: Stronger AQP1 staining in the 
choroid plexus apical membrane of spontaneously hypertensive rats versus normotensive controls. Adapted from 
Tomassoni D, et al. [202] with permission of Elsevier BV, obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.  
d) 
Decreased CSF Reabsorption 
 
Edsbagge et al. [205] measured the magnitude of CSF reabsorption in healthy individuals as a 
function of activity, CSF production, ICP, and spinal CSF movement using lumbar puncture and 
Normotensive 
Hypertensive 
Aquaporin-1 membrane protein  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
76 
 
radionuclide cisternography. They found that as much as 76% of CSF reabsorption may take 
place via the spinal arachnoid villi/lymphatics when upright and decreased to 38% in the prone 
position. This implies that the hydrostatic gradients responsible for increased CSF spinal 
reabsorption may be significantly diminished in the spaceflight environment. Combining these 
phenomena with impaired cranial CSF absorption may lead to increased ICP in space in some 
astronauts. CSF is ultimately reabsorbed into venous blood and therefore spaceflight-induced 
alterations in lymphatic and venous drainage of the cranium and spine may influence CSF 
outflow resistance. Measuring preflight CSF outflow resistance with postural changes may 
identify a cohort of astronauts who have a poor CSF reabsorption reserve. Microgravity induced 
cranial lymphatic insufficiency may precipitate the changes we are seeing in symptomatic 
astronauts. 
 
The following list contains CNS components that may be involved in the development of the 
VIIP syndrome. As additional data is collected these items will be reviewed for their potential 
contribution. 
• Inflammatory cytokines, signaling molecules  
• Arachnoid villi –defects in absorption (such as subarachnoid hemorrhage - 
scarring) 
• Elevated ICP and inflammatory damage to the arachnoid membrane 
• Venous and lymphatics – elongation and stretching of neural and vascular structures  
• Impaired cranial lymphatic drainage with cephalad-fluid shift 
• Interparenchymal interstitial fluid accumulation  
• Risk of onset of normal pressure hydrocephalus, or spontaneous CSF leak: does 
prolonged elevated pressure within the CSF space precipitate a spontaneous rupture and 
CSF leak  
 
e) 
Decreased Intracranial Compliance 
 
Decreased intracranial compliance is another risk factor that is a potential contributor to 
development of the VIIP syndrome. Alperin et al. [200], measured volume and pressure changes 
in humans and baboons by using phase-contrast MRI studies of blood and  CSF flow. They 
calculated intracranial volume changes from the net transcranial CSF and blood volumetric flow 
rates. The change in ICP was derived from the change in the CSF pressure gradient calculated 
from CSF velocity. An elastance index was then derived from the ratio of pressure to volume 
change. This study is significant in that CSF pressure gradient waveforms were derived from the 
CSF velocity phase-contrast images by using the Navier-Stokes relationship between pressure 
gradient and temporal and spatial derivatives of the fluid velocity for incompressible fluid in a 
rigid tube. The velocity information from cine phase contrast MRI allows for the noninvasive 
estimation of pressure gradients and fluid flow through various areas of interest such as the 
fourth ventricle or foramen magnum. 
 
f) 
Using Ultrasound to Estimate ICP 
 
Recent studies have implied a causal relationship between estimated ICP and ONSD measured 
by sonographic imaging [206] (Figure 49). Ultrasound imaging of the eye in the emergency 
room is more commonly used to rule out any visual defect secondary to retinal detachment, 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
77 
 
vitreous detachment, or bleeding. Numerous techniques have been devised to estimate relative 
and absolute changes in ICP. Helmke et al. [207, 208] showed that a segment of the ONSD 
approximately 3 mm behind the papilla showed maximal diameter fluctuations induced by 
gelatinous injections in postmortem preparations. This ONSD landmark has been used in 
several clinical trials correlating elevated CSF pressure with ONSD derived ICP [209-212]. 
Hansen et al. [64] used B-mode ultrasound imaging of ONSD during intrathecal infusion of 
Ringer‟s lactate. They found a linear relationship between ONSD and CSF pressure (R2 = 
0.752). The ONSD dilation depends on the communication of the perineural CSF compartment 
around the optic nerve and the craniospinal subarachnoid space. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
g) 
Central Nervous System Conclusions 
 
In summary, the microgravity induced fluid shift could lead to an increase in ICP by several 
proposed mechanisms. The spaceflight-induced jugular vein distension could cause potential 
cerebral venous congestion and decreased CSF outflow leading to increased ICP. Other 
mechanisms include increased CSF production and decreased CSF absorption. The theory that 
ICP is increased as a result of spaceflight is supported by some of the symptoms, optic-disc 
edema, posterior globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts, although other notable 
symptoms have not been shown in the VIIP syndrome. The putative ICP increase may be also 
related to other functional, sensory and cognitive changes seen in spaceflight. These effects 
could be more pronounced in astronauts with genetic, anatomical, or lifestyle factors which 
increase the likelihood of manifesting the symptoms. Increased ICP may only be one of several 
factors causing the constellation of symptoms seen in the VIIP syndrome.  
 
 
 
Figure 49: Terrestrial correlation of ONSD 
measurement and optic nerve diameter with 
ICP. ICP was measured by lumbar puncture. 
Reproduced from Geeraerts T, and others 
[206] which is an open access article, 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), 
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, 
and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original work is properly cited. © 2008 
Geeraerts and others.; licensee BioMed 
Central Ltd. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
78 
 
V. 
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS 
Several factors contribute to this unique environment including microgravity, potential 
alterations in localized CO2 levels and a high sodium level in a closed food system. The factors 
are likely to be important contributors to the visual changes seen during flight. 
 
A. 
Potential In-flight Factors  
1. 
Alterations in Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Metabolism 
An additional risk factor for the development of the VIIP syndrome and the elevated ICP 
measures may be localized elevations in CO2 levels encountered by astronauts on the ISS. The 
ISS is a closed system and a rise in CO2 levels as a product of respiration would be expected. 
CO2 is normally removed by external venting or chemical „scrubbing‟. On Earth, the ambient 
CO2 concentration is about 0.03% by volume (0.23 mm Hg) [213]. Nominal CO2 levels on the 
ISS are between 2.3 to 5.3 mm Hg. The CO2 levels that the VIIP affected astronauts were 
exposed to during their ISS missions did not exceed 5 mm Hg. Although this is more than 20 
times higher than the 0.23 mm Hg on the Earth‟s surface, this CO2 level terrestrially is generally 
not thought to cause long-term detrimental physiologic effects [214, 215]. Perhaps long-term 
exposure to these levels in conjunction with the effects of microgravity fluid shifts may have an 
impact on ICP.  
 
Carbon dioxide is a natural product of metabolism. Each person exhales about 200 mL of CO2 
per minute at rest and may produce over 4.0 L/min at maximal exercise [216]. Left unchecked, 
CO2 can accumulate quickly inside a closed environment. Other sources of CO2 include 
combustion, decay of organic matter, and fire suppression systems.  
 
Several important physiologic processes in the human body are modulated by CO2. When blood 
CO2 levels rise, ventilation and heart rate increase to enhance the body‟s elimination of CO2. 
Hypercapnia also stimulates vasodilation of cerebral blood vessels, increased cerebral blood 
flow, and elevated ICP, presumably leading to headache, visual disturbance, impaired mental 
function, and other central nervous system (CNS) symptoms. Carbon dioxide is known to be a 
potent vasodilator and an increase in cerebral perfusion pressure will increase the CSF fluid 
production by about 4% [217].  
 
Physiologic tolerance time for various CO2 concentrations and acute health effects of exposure to 
high concentrations of CO2 are summarized in Table 4.  
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
79 
 
Table 4: Physiologic Tolerance Time for Various CO2 Concentrations and Acute Health Effects of High 
Concentrations of CO2 
 
Physiologic Tolerance 
Acute Health Effects 
ppC02 
Maximum 
Duration of 
 
mm 
Hg 
% 
Exposure Limit 
(Minutes) 
Exposure 
Effects 
3.8 
0.5% 
Indefinite 
 
 
7.5 
1.0% 
Indefinite 
 
 
11 
1.5% 
480 
 
 
15 
2.0% 
60 
Several hours 
Headache, dyspnea upon mild exertion 
23 
3.0% 
20 
1 hour 
Headache, sweating, dyspnea at rest 
30 
4.0% 
10 
(4% to 5%)  
Within few 
minutes 
Headache, dizziness, increased blood 
pressure, uncomfortable dyspnea 
38 
5.0% 
7 
45 
6.0% 
5 
1 to 2 minutes 
≤16 minutes 
Several hours 
Hearing, visual disturbances 
Headache, dyspnea, tremors 
53 
7.0% 
<3 
(7% to 10%)  
Few minutes 
1.5 minutes to 2 
hours 
9% for 5 minutes 
Unconsciousness, near-unconsciousness 
Headache, increased heart rate, shortness 
of breath, dizziness, sweating, rapid 
breathing 
Lowest published lethal concentration 
68 
9.0% 
N/A 
75 
10% 
N/A 
(>10% to 15%)  
1 minute to 
several minutes 
Dizziness, drowsiness, severe muscle 
twitching, unconsciousness 
113 
15% 
N/A 
128 
17% 
N/A 
(17% to 30%)  
Within 1 minute 
Loss of controlled and purposeful activity, 
unconsciousness, convulsions, coma, 
death 
Adapted from EPA 2000 [218]. 
 
a) 
Local Fluctuations in CO2 Levels 
Because air convection is significantly reduced in microgravity, local pockets of CO2 may form 
around sources of CO2 such as the nose and mouth. A computational fluid dynamics analysis 
revealed that without adequate ventilation, ppCO2 could rise above 9 mm Hg within 10 minutes 
around a sleeping astronaut‟s mouth and chin [219]. 
 
Few investigations to date have measured true CO2 exposures. The ISS and Shuttle sensors 
(Major Constituent Analyzer or MCA) have fixed locations that do not necessarily reflect local 
CO2 levels around astronauts as they move inside the crew compartments. Even the portable CO2 
monitors (CDMs) may not measure truly local ppCO2, unless the monitors are worn by the 
astronauts close to their breathing zone. Generally, the CDMs are placed on cabin walls and not 
directly next to the crew. In other words, CDM data may not be representative of what the crew 
truly experiences. What little data are available already show fluctuations in the CDM ppCO2 
readings that are not detected by the MCA, especially during exercise. Local effects have yet to 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
80 
 
be characterized during known rapid changes in ppCO2 that the MCA can measure, for example 
when a CO2 scrubber is being changed out or when one vehicle docks with another that has a 
different level of CO2 [213]. 
 
All in all, more data are needed to further the understanding of individual and environmental 
factors that contribute to CO2-related symptoms in microgravity. It may be that certain 
individuals or genders are more susceptible to CO2 retention and increased ICP, but until true 
exposure data are available to correlate symptoms and ppCO2, no conclusion can be drawn at this 
time about CO2 susceptibility in spaceflight. 
 
b) 
Crew Reports of Symptoms 
One of the first reports of possible CO2 toxicity on the ISS came from the ISS-2A crew. 
Headache was reported on two occasions: one while crewmembers were working inside a 
confined space where there was reduced air flow and the other when all of the crewmembers 
were gathered in a single location. Both times, crewmembers described their symptoms as 
similar to those they experienced when they were intentionally exposed to excess CO2 during 
ground training [213]. Similarly, the crew of STS-123 reported ill effects and feeling of 
confinement that were attributed to CO2 overexposure when the entire crew tried to gather 
together for a meal [220]. 
 
Other informal reports of „CO2-like symptoms‟ on board the ISS were recorded on STS-112/ISS-
9A, STS-113/ISS-11A, and Expedition 6 [221]. An analysis of the LSAH examined the 
symptoms of headache and blurred/altered vision. All instances of complaints voiced during 
private medical conferences (PMCs) and open communication were recorded. Peak levels of 
CO2 were evaluated with associated symptoms over 24-hour (Figure 50) and 7-day (Figure 51) 
periods.  
 
 
Figure 50: Reported 
observations and 
corresponding peak ppCO2 
levels during a 24-hour period. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
81 
 
 
These symptoms were completely resolved with the lowering of the ppCO2. It was also noticed 
that the symptoms were alleviated temporarily with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), but not completely resolved or exacerbated with the NSAID levels waning and CO2 
not returning to routine levels.  
Data from several studies show that ambient CO2 readings are normal. However, those ambient 
readings do not reflect the reduced airflow in the station, nor do they reflect the pockets of CO2 
that can accumulate around the crewmembers‟ noses and mouths. 
 
c) 
CO2 Susceptibility 
Both individual and environmental factors may contribute to crewmembers‟ susceptibility to 
CO2 effects in microgravity. Some individuals appear to be more prone to CO2 retention and 
therefore develop symptoms at lower CO2 levels. Differences in physiologic adaptation to 
microgravity may also be a factor in individual susceptibilities. Nonetheless, high enough levels 
of CO2 will cause toxicity in all crewmembers. While ambient spacecraft CO2 levels have 
generally remained below flight limits, local elevations not measured by fixed sensors may be 
responsible for the development of CO2-related symptoms.  
 
d) 
Environmental Factor: CO2 Conclusion  
The effects of ambient CO2 and exposure limits have been well studied on Earth. However, 
informal crew reports on the ISS have suggested that astronauts are developing CO2-related 
symptoms such as headache and lethargy at lower than expected CO2 levels and that symptoms 
tend to resolve when CO2 level is decreased. In-flight data to date support an association between 
elevated ppCO2 and CO2-related symptoms, but more research is needed to conclude causality. 
What appears to be increased CO2 sensitivity in microgravity may be attributable to individual 
predisposition to CO2 retention, adaptation to microgravity, and local fluctuations in CO2 that are 
not measured by fixed sensors.  
Figure 51: Reported 
observations and 
corresponding peak 
ppCO2 levels during a 7-
day period.  
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
82 
 
2. 
Alterations in Sodium  
A link between increased ICP and altered sodium and water retention was suggested by a report 
in which 77%of IIH patients had evidence of peripheral edema and 80% had orthostatic retention 
of sodium and water [222]. Impaired saline and water load excretions were noted in the upright 
posture in IIH patients with orthostatic edema compared to lean and obese controls without IIH. 
However, the precise mechanisms linking orthostatic changes and IIH were not defined, and 
many IIH patients do not have these sodium and water abnormalities. Astronauts are well known 
to have orthostatic intolerance upon return to gravity after long-duration spaceflight, and the 
dietary sodium on orbit is also known to be in excess of 5 grams per day in some cases. The 
majority of the NASA cases did have high dietary sodium during their increment. The ISS 
program is working to decrease in-flight dietary sodium intake to less than 3 grams per day. 
Sodium has been described in detail in other evidence reports [222]. 
3. 
Exercise 
Exercise is an important countermeasure used to maintain muscle, bone, and cardiac health 
during spaceflight. However, the effects of exercise on ICP and IOP during spaceflight or 
simulated spaceflight have yet to be examined. Historically, Russian scientists have used a 
variety of exercise hardware and in-flight exercise protocols during long-duration spaceflight (up 
to and beyond 1 year) on board the Mir space station. On the ISS, a combination of resistive and 
aerobic exercise is used. For missions to the moon, establishment of a lunar base, and 
interplanetary travel to Mars or to an asteroid, the functional requirements for physical human 
performance during each specific phase of these missions have not been sufficiently defined to 
determine whether currently developed exercise countermeasures are adequate. Long-duration 
missions and exploration missions with several transitions between gravitational environments 
present the greatest challenges to risk mitigation and to development of countermeasures of 
proven efficacy. 
 
a) 
Effects of Resistive Exercise on ICP and IOP 
Despite its benefits on skeletal morphology and function, the effects of resistive exercise on the 
development of elevated ICP remain controversial. In an early investigation, Hamilton et al. 
reported that the increase in intrathoracic pressure during a brief (phase I) Valsalva maneuver 
was transmitted directly to the intracranial compartment, resulting in a concomitant rise in ICP 
[223]. Two recent investigations used transcranial Doppler ultrasound techniques to examine 
cerebral hemodynamics (cerebral blood flow [CBF]) during resistance exercise [224, 225]. 
Unfortunately, this noninvasive technique can only measure blood velocity through a cerebral 
artery, and does not allow a true understanding of cerebral hemodynamic changes associated 
with resistive exercise. To address this issue, Haykowsky et al. invasively examined ICP in fully 
cooperative, alert, and clinically stable patients who received a ventricular drain as part of their 
surgical procedure and postoperative care. They reported that resistive exercise without a 
Valsalva maneuver resulted in no change in peak systolic pressure or ICP [226]. 
 
The effects of resistive exercise on IOP are less controversial. An early study reported that 
resistive exercise training induced an increase in IOP [227]. A significant increase in IOP was 
also reported immediately after a static squat done until voluntary termination[228], and during 
bench press [229]. A dramatic increase in IOP (115%) was observed in experienced strength 
trained subjects during a maximal static muscle contraction combined with Valsalva maneuver 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
83 
 
[230]. However, IOP was decreased after static muscular actions, such as handgrip exercise in 
subjects with normal IOP values [231]. Post-exercise, IOP then declined to 14% less than the 
pre-exercise values [228]. The only study that incorporated dynamic muscular contractions 
reported that IOP was reduced 40% after a series of isokinetic muscular actions in subjects with 
normal IOP [232]. More recently, Chromiak et al. demonstrated that IOP declines after one or 
more sets of chest press and leg press performed at moderate intensity [233]. Consequently, it 
appears as though resistance exercise performed without a Valsalva maneuver will not elevate 
ICP or IOP during exercise, and may even decrease ocular and cranial pressures post-exercise.  
 
b) 
Effects of Aerobic Exercise on ICP and IOP 
In contrast to numerous investigations examining the effects of resistive exercise on cranial 
pressures, there is a dearth of information regarding the consequences of aerobic exercise on 
ICP. To our knowledge the only study to examine ICP during aerobic exercise invasively 
measured ICP in patients with normal and increased ICP [234]. The researchers found that 
exercise tended to decrease ICP both in patients with intracranial hypertension and those with 
normal ICP. They suggested that because aerobic exercise is generally conducted without 
Valsalva maneuvers, it is unlikely that ICP will increase during exercise. However, other studies 
have demonstrated that in both animals and humans global brain blood flow increases 20% to 
30% during the transition from rest to moderate exercise [235, 236]. Interestingly, more recent 
work has shown that an increase in exercise intensity up to ~60% VO2max results in an increase 
in CBF, after which CBF decreases towards baseline values (sometimes decreasing below 
baseline values) with increasing exercise intensity [237-240]. These findings suggest that high 
intensity exercise may be a key countermeasure to decrease CBF and thus potentially ICP.  
 
It is well established that IOP decreases transiently with aerobic exercise in proportion to 
intensity and duration (Figure 52) [241]. For example, IOP was reduced 28% immediately after 
cycling at a low intensity for 1 hour in sedentary subjects [242]. In individuals with elevated IOP 
(18 mmHg or greater), IOP was reduced after a single bout of aerobic exercise [243]. Another 
investigation demonstrated that IOP was decreased by 30% after an incremental cycle test to 
exhaustion in subjects with IOP values of 22 mmHg or greater [244]. These exercise-induced 
decreases in IOP have important implications for spaceflight and simulated spaceflight, where 
significant increases in IOP have been documented [40]. 
 
 
 
Figure 52: Impact of aerobic exercise on 
IOP. Reproduced from Harris A, and others 
[241], with permission of the Association for 
Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, 
obtained via Copyright Clearance Center, 
Inc.  
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
84 
 
B. 
Genetic Factors/Markers 
1. 
One-Carbon Metabolism (Homocysteine)  
About 20% of astronauts on long-duration ISS missions have developed measurable ophthalmic 
changes after flight[1]. The current in-flight nutrition study (Nutrition SMO 016E) has provided 
biochemical evidence that the folate-dependent one-carbon metabolic pathway may be altered in 
those individuals. Serum concentrations of homocysteine, cystathionine, 2-methylcitric acid, and 
methylmalonic acid were significantly (P < 0.001) higher (25% to 45%) in astronauts with 
ophthalmic changes than in those without such changes [245, 246]. These differences existed 
before, during, and after flight. Serum folate tended to be lower (P = 0.06) in individuals with 
ophthalmic changes. Preflight serum concentrations of cystathionine and 2-methylcitric acid, and 
mean in-flight serum folate, were significantly (P < .05) correlated with changes in refraction 
(postflight relative to preflight). At first, investigators thought the ophthalmic changes were 
caused by fluid shifts and increased ICP brought on by microgravity, but data from the Nutrition 
SMO 016E provided evidence for an alternative hypothesis: that individuals with this altered 
metabolic pathway may be predisposed to anatomic and/or physiologic changes that render them 
susceptible to ophthalmologic damage during spaceflight. These data have been submitted for 
peer review and publication, and a follow-on proposal has been submitted to HRP to follow up 
and clarify this finding. 
 
2. 
Biomarkers 
There are several potential biomarkers that may be used for early detection of the VIIP syndrome 
or to identify astronauts with increased risk for developing the syndrome. The Panel members of 
the 2010 Visual Impairment Summit suggested several biomarkers as potential candidates 
including S-100, platelet count, albumin, CRP/inflammation markers, insulin-like growth factor, 
somatostatin, tet-transactivator (TTA), myelin basic protein, immunoglobin G index, oligo-
clonal bands, atrial naturetic peptide, vasopressin, and aquaporin. In addition, gene expression 
profiling, epigenetic modifications of gene expression, proteomics, metabolomics, CO2 retaining 
variants, single nucleotide polymorphisms, and copy number variants should be expanded in 
order to better characterize the individual susceptibility to develop the VIIP syndrome. As the 
etiology of the symptoms is more clearly defined the appropriate biomarkers will be evaluated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
85 
 
VI. 
CASE DEFINITION/CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES 
In response to the identification of the symptoms, the Space Medicine Division developed 
clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of affected astronauts. According to the guidelines, 
all long-duration astronauts that have demonstrated postflight refractive changes should be 
considered a suspected case; cases could be further differentiated by definitive imaging studies 
establishing the postflight presence of optic-disc edema, increased ONSD, and altered OCT 
findings. The results of the imaging studies are divided into five classes that determine the 
follow-up testing/monitoring that is required. The definition of the classes and Frisén scale used 
for optic-disc edema diagnosis are listed below. 
 
Class 0 
• < .50 diopter cycloplegic refractive change 
• No evidence of optic-disc edema, nerve sheath distention, choroidal folds, globe 
flattening, scotoma, or cotton-wool spots compared to baseline  
 
Class 1 (repeat OCT and visual acuity in 6 weeks) 
• Refractive changes ≥ .50 diopter cycloplegic refractive change and/or cotton-wool spot 
• No evidence of optic-disc edema, nerve sheath distention, choroidal folds, globe 
flattening, scotoma, compared to baseline  
• CSF opening pressure (if measured) ≤ 25 cm H2O 
 
Class 2 (repeat OCT, cycloplegic refraction, fundus examination and threshold visual field every 
4 to 6 weeks × 6 months, repeat MRI in 6 months) 
• ≥ .50 diopter cycloplegic refractive changes or cotton-wool spot 
• Choroidal folds and/or ONS distension and/or globe flattening and/or scotoma 
• No evidence of optic-disc edema 
• CSF opening pressure ≤ 25 cm H2O (if measured) 
 
Class 3 (repeat OCT, cycloplegic refraction, fundus examination and threshold visual field every 
4 to 6 weeks × 6 months, repeat MRI in 6 months) 
• ≥ .50 diopter cycloplegic refractive changes and/or cotton-wool spot 
• Optic nerve sheath distension, and/or globe flattening and/or choroidal folds and/or 
scotoma 
• Optic-disc edema of Grade 0-2 
• CSF opening pressure ≤ 25 cm H2O 
 
Class 4 (institute treatment protocol as per Clinical Practice Guideline) 
• ≥ .50 diopter cycloplegic refractive changes and/or cotton-wool spot 
• Optic nerve sheath distension, and/or globe flattening and/or choroidal folds and/or 
scotoma 
• Optic-disc edema Grade 2 or above 
• Presenting symptoms of new headache, pulsatile tinnitus and/or transient visual 
obscurations 
• CSF opening pressure > 25 cm H2O 
 
Optic-disc edema will be graded based on the Frisén Scale [247] as below: 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
86 
 
 
Stage 0 – Normal Optic Disc 
Blurring of nasal, superior and inferior poles in inverse proportion to disc diameter. Radial nerve 
fiber layer (NFL) without NFL tortuosity. Rare obscuration of a major blood vessel, usually on 
the upper pole. 
 
Stage 1 – Very Early Optic-disc edema 
Obscuration of the nasal border of the disc. No elevation of the disc borders. Disruption of the 
normal radial NFL arrangement with grayish opacity accentuating nerve fiber layer bundles. 
Normal temporal disc margin. Subtle grayish halo with temporal gap (best seen with indirect 
ophthalmoscopy). Concentric or radial retrochoroidal folds. 
 
Stage 2 – Early Optic-disc edema  
Obscuration of all borders. Elevation of the nasal border. Complete peripapillary halo.  
 
Stage 3 – Moderate Optic-disc edema  
Obscurations of all borders. Increased diameter of ONH. Obscuration of one or more segments 
of major blood vessels leaving the disc. Peripapillary halo-irregular outer fringe with finger-like 
extensions.  
 
Stage 4 –- Marked Optic-disc edema 
Elevation of the entire nerve head. Obscuration of all borders. Peripapillary halo. Total 
obscuration on the disc of a segment of a major blood vessel.  
 
Stage 5 – Severe Optic-disc edema 
Dome-shaped protrusions representing anterior expansion of the ONH. Peripapillary halo is 
narrow and smoothly demarcated. Total obscuration of a segment of a major blood vessel may or 
may not be present. Obliteration of the optic cup. 
 
VII. GAPS 
The risk of microgravity-induced VIIP has recently been identified. Currently, there is little pre, 
in-, and postflight data to characterize this risk. Below is a list of related unanswered issues that 
will help to define the VIIP syndrome and characterize the risk for exploration class missions.  
 
Current knowledge gaps: 
• VIIP1: What is the etiology of visual acuity and ocular structural and functional changes 
seen in-flight and postflight? 
• VIIP3: Identify in-flight diagnostic tools to measure changes in ocular structure and 
function and/or ICP related to the VIIP syndrome. (hardware/techwatch) 
• VIIP12: What are the suitable ground-based analogs to study the VIIP spaceflight-
associated phenomenon? (analog) 
• VIIP13: What are the safe and effective countermeasures (CMs) to mitigate changes in 
ocular structure and function and intracranial hypertension for spaceflight? 
(countermeasures) 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
87 
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
In summary, fifteen long-duration male astronauts ranging in age from 45 to 55 years have 
experienced confirmed in-flight and postflight visual and anatomical changes including optic-
disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts. Four of these astronauts 
experienced above normal CSF pressure measured during lumbar puncture postflight. This 
requires careful interpretation though, as it should be noted that preflight measures were not 
collected. Although many astronauts experience only visual acuity changes, other astronauts 
experience more concerning changes such as optic-disc edema and choroidal folds, and the 
duration and severity of these changes are not consistent across those affected. While the 
underlying etiology of these changes is unknown at this time, the spaceflight community at 
NASA, as well as an external expert panel, suspects that the microgravity-induced cephalad-fluid 
shift and commensurate changes in physiology play a significant role. Astronauts exposed to 
microgravity experience a cephalad-fluid shift, and both symptomatic and asymptomatic (with 
respect to changes in visual acuity) astronauts have exhibited ONS enlargement on MRI. The 
etiology of these intraocular and orbital findings is unknown, but we hypothesize that they may 
result from obstructed vascular (venous) outflow, a rise in ICP or as a result of a constellation of 
localized events, occurring within the intraorbital optic nerve without a rise in CSF pressure [40, 
248]. This fluid shift may lead to increases in stroke volume [90, 91], cardiac output [92], ICP 
[249], and likely elevates IOP [40]. It is likely that there is significant variation across subjects in 
the type and volume of the fluid shift experienced in spaceflight [89]. Contributing factors may 
include pockets of increased CO2 and high sodium diet, but it seems unlikely that resistive or 
aerobic exercise is involved. In fact, they may be potential countermeasures to reduce IOP and 
ICP in-flight.  
 
The current knowledge gaps have been identified and a research plan is being developed to 
address these questions in a prioritized manner. As studies are completed and the knowledge of 
the condition is increased, the evidence report and research plan will be updated and reviewed. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
88 
 
IX. 
REFERENCES  
1. 
Mader TH, Gibson CR, Pass AF, Kramer LA, Lee AG, Fogarty J, Tarver WJ, Dervay JP, 
Hamilton DR, Sargsyan A, Phillips JL, Tran D, Lipsky W, Choi J, Stern C, Kuyumjian R, 
Polk JD. Optic disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts 
observed in Astronauts after long-duration space flight. Ophthalmology, 2011; 118(10): 
2058-69. 
2. 
Fogarty J, Otto C, Kerstman E, Oubre C, Wu J. The visual impairment intracranial 
pressure summit report. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 2011(Technical 
Publication): TP-2011-216160. 
3. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Papilledema summit: summary report. 
2010(Technical Publication): TM-2010-216114. 
4. 
Alemayehu W. Pseudotumor cerebri (toxic effect of the "magic bullet"). Ethiop Med J, 
1995; 33(4): 265-70. 
5. 
Allen JB, Jeng PS, Levitt H. Evaluation of human middle ear function via an acoustic 
power assessment. J Rehabil Res Dev, 2005; 42(4 Suppl 2): 63-78. 
6. 
Alperin N. MR-intracranial compliance and pressure: a method for noninvasive 
measurement of important neurophysiologic parameters. Methods Enzymol, 2004; 386: 
323-49. 
7. 
Alperin N, Hushek SG, Lee SH, Sivaramakrishnan A, Lichtor T. MRI study of cerebral 
blood flow and CSF flow dynamics in an upright posture: the effect of posture on the 
intracranial compliance and pressure. Acta Neurochir Suppl, 2005; 95: 177-81. 
8. 
Alperin N, Kulkarni K, Loth F, Roitberg B, Foroohar M, Mafee MF, Lichtor T. Analysis 
of magnetic resonance imaging-based blood and cerebrospinal fluid flow measurements 
in patients with Chiari I malformation: a system approach. Neurosurg Focus, 2001; 11(1): 
E6. 
9. 
Alperin N, Lee SH, Mazda M, Hushek SG, Roitberg B, Goddwin J, Lichtor T. Evidence 
for the importance of extracranial venous flow in patients with idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (IIH). Acta Neurochir Suppl, 2005; 95: 129-32. 
10. 
Alperin N, Lee SH, Sivaramakrishnan A, Hushek SG. Quantifying the effect of posture 
on intracranial physiology in humans by MRI flow studies. J Magn Reson Imaging, 2005; 
22(5): 591-6. 
11. 
Mayasnikov VI, Stepanova SI, Features of cerebral hemodynamics in cosmonauts before 
and after flight on the MIR Orbital Station, in Orbital Station MIR Vol 2; 2008; Institute 
of Biomedical Problems: State Scientific Center of Russian Federation. 300-305. 
12. 
Liu JH, Kripke DF, Hoffman RE, Twa MD, Loving RT, Rex KM, Gupta N, Weinreb RN. 
Nocturnal elevation of intraocular pressure in young adults. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 
1998; 39(13): 2707-12. 
13. 
Liu JH, Bouligny RP, Kripke DF, Weinreb RN. Nocturnal elevation of intraocular 
pressure is detectable in the sitting position. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2003; 44(10): 
4439-42. 
14. 
Mosaed S, Liu JH, Weinreb RN. Correlation between office and peak nocturnal 
intraocular pressures in healthy subjects and glaucoma patients. Am J Ophthalmol, 2005; 
139(2): 320-4. 
15. 
Liu JH, Zhang X, Kripke DF, Weinreb RN. Twenty-four-hour intraocular pressure 
pattern associated with early glaucomatous changes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2003; 
44(4): 1586-90. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
89 
 
16. 
Craven ER, Raised episcleral venous pressure, in Ophthalmology, Y.a. Duker, Editor 
2008; Mosby. 
17. 
Mansouri K, Weinreb RN, Liu JH. Effects of aging on 24-hour intraocular pressure 
measurements in sitting and supine body positions. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2012; 
53(1): 112-6. 
18. 
Phelps CD, Armaly MF. Measurement of episcleral venous pressure. Am J Ophthalmol, 
1978; 85(1): 35-42. 
19. 
Gordon MO, Beiser JA, Brandt JD, Heuer DK, Higginbotham EJ, Johnson CA, Keltner 
JL, Miller JP, Parrish RK, 2nd, Wilson MR, Kass MA. The ocular hypertension treatment 
study: baseline factors that predict the onset of primary open-angle glaucoma. Arch 
Ophthalmol, 2002; 120(6): 714-20; discussion 829-30. 
20. 
Xu X, Li L, Cao R, Tao Y, Guo Q, Geng J, Li Y, Zhang Z. Intraocular pressure and 
ocular perfusion pressure in myopes during 21 min head-down rest. Aviat Space Environ 
Med, 2010; 81(4): 418-22. 
21. 
Jinkins JR. "Papilledema": neuroradiologic evaluation of optic disk protrusion with 
dynamic orbital CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol, 1987; 149(4): 793-802. 
22. 
Morgan WH, Chauhan BC, Yu DY, Cringle SJ, Alder VA, House PH. Optic disc 
movement with variations in intraocular and cerebrospinal fluid pressure. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2002; 43(10): 3236-42. 
23. 
Morgan WH, Yu DY, Alder VA, Cringle SJ, Cooper RL, House PH, Constable IJ. The 
correlation between cerebrospinal fluid pressure and retrolaminar tissue pressure. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 1998; 39(8): 1419-28. 
24. 
Quigley HA, Addicks EM, Green WR. Optic nerve damage in human glaucoma. III. 
Quantitative correlation of nerve fiber loss and visual field defect in glaucoma, ischemic 
neuropathy, papilledema, and toxic neuropathy. Arch Ophthalmol, 1982; 100(1): 135-46. 
25. 
Lashutka MK, Chandra A, Murray HN, Phillips GS, Hiestand BC. The relationship of 
intraocular pressure to intracranial pressure. Ann Emerg Med, 2004; 43(5): 585-91. 
26. 
Sajjadi SA, Harirchian MH, Sheikhbahaei N, Mohebbi MR, Malekmadani MH, Saberi H. 
The relation between intracranial and intraocular pressures: study of 50 patients. Ann 
Neurol, 2006; 59(5): 867-70. 
27. 
Spentzas T, Henricksen J, Patters AB, Chaum E. Correlation of intraocular pressure with 
intracranial pressure in children with severe head injuries. Pediatr Crit Care Med, 2010; 
11(5): 593-8. 
28. 
Gotoh TM, Fujiki N, Tanaka K, Matsuda T, Gao S, Morita H. Acute hemodynamic 
responses in the head during microgravity induced by free drop in anesthetized rats. Am J 
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 2004; 286(6): R1063-8. 
29. 
Kramer LA, Sargsyan AE, Hasan KM, Polk JD, Hamilton DR. Orbital and intracranial 
effects of microgravity: findings at 3-T MR imaging. Radiology, 2012; 263(3): 819-27. 
30. 
Khanna RK, Pham CJ, Malik GM, Spickler EM, Mehta B, Rosenblum ML. Bilateral 
superior ophthalmic vein enlargement associated with diffuse cerebral swelling. Report 
of 11 cases. J Neurosurg, 1997; 86(5): 893-7. 
31. 
Lirng JF, Fuh JL, Wu ZA, Lu SR, Wang SJ. Diameter of the superior ophthalmic vein in 
relation to intracranial pressure. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol, 2003; 24(4): 700-3. 
32. 
Chen WT, Fuh JL, Lirng JF, Lu SR, Wu ZA, Wang SJ. Collapsed superior ophthalmic 
veins in patients with spontaneous intracranial hypotension. Neurology, 2003; 61(9): 
1265-7. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
90 
 
33. 
Smith TJ, Lewis J. Effect of inverted body position intraocular pressure. Am J 
Ophthalmol, 1985; 99(5): 617-8. 
34. 
Hayreh SS. Orbital vascular anatomy. Eye (Lond), 2006; 20(10): 1130-44. 
35. 
Czarnik T, Gawda R, Latka D, Kolodziej W, Sznajd-Weron K, Weron R. Noninvasive 
measurement of intracranial pressure: is it possible? J Trauma, 2007; 62(1): 207-11. 
36. 
Czarnik T, Gawda R, Kolodziej W, Latka D, Sznajd-Weron K, Weron R. Associations 
between intracranial pressure, intraocular pressure and mean arterial pressure in patients 
with traumatic and non-traumatic brain injuries. Injury, 2009; 40(1): 33-9. 
37. 
Muchnok T, Deitch K, Giraldo P. Can intraocular pressure measurements be used to 
screen for elevated intracranial pressure in emergency department patients? J Emerg 
Med, 2010. 
38. 
Mader TH, Gibson CR, Caputo M, Hunter N, Taylor G, Charles J, Meehan RT. 
Intraocular pressure and retinal vascular changes during transient exposure to 
microgravity. Am J Ophthalmol, 1993; 115(3): 347-50. 
39. 
Draeger J, Hanke K. Postural variations of intraocular pressure--preflight experiments for 
the D1-mission. Ophthalmic Res, 1986; 18(1): 55-60. 
40. 
Draeger J, Schwartz R, Groenhoff S, Stern C. Self-tonometry under microgravity 
conditions. Aviat Space Environ Med, 1995; 66(6): 568-70. 
41. 
Draeger J, Schwartz R, Groenhoff S, Stern C. [Self tonometry during the German 1993 
Spacelab D2 mission]. Ophthalmologe, 1994; 91(5): 697-9. 
42. 
Mader TH, Taylor GR, Hunter N, Caputo M, Meehan RT. Intraocular pressure, retinal 
vascular, and visual acuity changes during 48 hours of 10 degrees head-down tilt. Aviat 
Space Environ Med, 1990; 61(9): 810-3. 
43. 
Taibbi G CR, Zanello S, Yarbough P, Vizzeri G, Evaluation of ocular outcomes in two 
14-day bed rest studies, in Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology 
(ARVO)2012: Ft Lauderdale, FL. 
44. 
Chiquet C, Custaud MA, Le Traon AP, Millet C, Gharib C, Denis P. Changes in 
intraocular pressure during prolonged (7-day) head-down tilt bedrest. J Glaucoma, 2003; 
12(3): 204-8. 
45. 
Wilson MR, Baker RS, Mohammadi P, Wheeler NC, Lee DA, Scott C. Reproducibility 
of postural changes in intraocular pressure with the Tono-Pen and Pulsair tonometers. 
Am J Ophthalmol, 1993; 116(4): 479-83. 
46. 
Liu JH, Kripke DF, Twa MD, Gokhale PA, Jones EI, Park EH, Meehan JE, Weinreb RN. 
Twenty-four-hour pattern of intraocular pressure in young adults with moderate to severe 
myopia. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2002; 43(7): 2351-5. 
47. 
Friberg TR, Weinreb RN. Ocular manifestations of gravity inversion. JAMA, 1985; 
253(12): 1755-7. 
48. 
Weinreb RN, Cook J, Friberg TR. Effect of inverted body position on intraocular 
pressure. Am J Ophthalmol, 1984; 98(6): 784-7. 
49. 
Shinojima A, Iwasaki K, Aoki K, Ogawa Y, Yanagida R, Yuzawa M. Subfoveal 
choroidal thickness and foveal retinal thickness during head-down tilt. Aviat Space 
Environ Med, 2012; 83(4): 388-93. 
50. 
Kuzmin M. Reactions of eye retinal vessels and intraocular pressure during man‟s 120 
day restriction to a horizontal position. Kosmicheskaya Biologiya I Meditsina, 1973; 
7(2). 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
91 
 
51. 
Delaey C, Van De Voorde J. Regulatory mechanisms in the retinal and choroidal 
circulation. Ophthalmic Res, 2000; 32(6): 249-56. 
52. 
Jonas JB, Berenshtein E, Holbach L. Lamina cribrosa thickness and spatial relationships 
between intraocular space and cerebrospinal fluid space in highly myopic eyes. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2004; 45(8): 2660-5. 
53. 
Linder BJ, Trick GL, Wolf ML. Altering body position affects intraocular pressure and 
visual function. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 1988; 29(10): 1492-7. 
54. 
Frey MA, Mader TH, Bagian JP, Charles JB, Meehan RT. Cerebral blood velocity and 
other cardiovascular responses to 2 days of head-down tilt. J Appl Physiol, 1993; 74(1): 
319-25. 
55. 
Drozdova NT, Grishin EP. [State of the visual analyzer during hypokinesia]. Kosm Biol 
Med, 1972; 6(4): 46-9. 
56. 
Mekjavic PJ, Eiken O, Mekjavic IB. Visual function after prolonged bed rest. J Gravit 
Physiol, 2002; 9(1): P31-2. 
57. 
Tso MO, Hayreh SS. Optic disc edema in raised intracranial pressure. IV. Axoplasmic 
transport in experimental papilledema. Arch Ophthalmol, 1977; 95(8): 1458-62. 
58. 
Berdahl JP, Allingham RR. Intracranial pressure and glaucoma. Curr Opin Ophthalmol, 
2010; 21(2): 106-11. 
59. 
Burgoyne CF, Downs JC, Bellezza AJ, Suh JK, Hart RT. The optic nerve head as a 
biomechanical structure: a new paradigm for understanding the role of IOP-related stress 
and strain in the pathophysiology of glaucomatous optic nerve head damage. Prog Retin 
Eye Res, 2005; 24(1): 39-73. 
60. 
Sigal IA, Flanagan JG, Ethier CR. Factors influencing optic nerve head biomechanics. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2005; 46(11): 4189-99. 
61. 
Schirmer CM, Hedges TR, 3rd. Mechanisms of visual loss in papilledema. Neurosurg 
Focus, 2007; 23(5): E5. 
62. 
Killer HE, Laeng HR, Flammer J, Groscurth P. Architecture of arachnoid trabeculae, 
pillars, and septa in the subarachnoid space of the human optic nerve: anatomy and 
clinical considerations. Br J Ophthalmol, 2003; 87(6): 777-81. 
63. 
Liu D, Kahn M. Measurement and relationship of subarachnoid pressure of the optic 
nerve to intracranial pressures in fresh cadavers. Am J Ophthalmol, 1993; 116(5): 548-
56. 
64. 
Hansen HC, Helmke K. Validation of the optic nerve sheath response to changing 
cerebrospinal fluid pressure: ultrasound findings during intrathecal infusion tests. J 
Neurosurg, 1997; 87(1): 34-40. 
65. 
Hansen HC, Lagreze W, Krueger O, Helmke K. Dependence of the optic nerve sheath 
diameter on acutely applied subarachnoidal pressure - an experimental ultrasound study. 
Acta Ophthalmol, 2011; 89(6): e528-32. 
66. 
Ansari R, Manuel FK, Geiser M, Moret F, Messer RK, King JF, Suh KI, Measurement of 
choroidal blood flow in zero gravity, in Ophthalmic technologies XII : 19-20 January 
2002, San Jose, USA, F. Manns, P.G. S derberg, and A. Ho, Editors. 2002; SPIE: 
Bellingham, Wash. 4951:177-184. 
67. 
Lavinsky J, Lavinsky D, Lavinsky F, Frutuoso A. Acquired choroidal folds: a sign of 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol, 2007; 245(6): 
883-8. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
92 
 
68. 
Anand-Apte B, Hollyfield JG, Developmental anatomy of the retinal and choroidal 
vasculature, in Encyclopedia of the eye, E. D. A. Dartt, Editor. 2010 Elsevier and 
ScienceDirect. pp. 9-15. 
69. 
Downs JC, Roberts MD, and  Burgoyne CF. Biomechanics of the Optic Nerve Head. 
2010: 183-201. 
70. 
Bellezza AJ, Hart RT, Burgoyne CF. The optic nerve head as a biomechanical structure: 
initial finite element modeling. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2000; 41(10): 2991-3000. 
71. 
Norman RE, Flanagan JG, Sigal IA, Rausch SM, Tertinegg I, Ethier CR. Finite element 
modeling of the human sclera: influence on optic nerve head biomechanics and 
connections with glaucoma. Exp Eye Res, 2011; 93(1): 4-12. 
72. 
Sigal IA, Flanagan JG, Tertinegg I, Ethier CR. Finite element modeling of optic nerve 
head biomechanics. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2004; 45(12): 4378-87. 
73. 
Margulies SS, Thibault LE. A proposed tolerance criterion for diffuse axonal injury in 
man. J Biomech, 1992; 25(8): 917-23. 
74. 
Albon J, Karwatowski WS, Avery N, Easty DL, Duance VC. Changes in the collagenous 
matrix of the aging human lamina cribrosa. Br J Ophthalmol, 1995; 79(4): 368-75. 
75. 
Karwatowski WS, Jeffries TE, Duance VC, Albon J, Bailey AJ, Easty DL. Preparation of 
Bruch's membrane and analysis of the age-related changes in the structural collagens. Br 
J Ophthalmol, 1995; 79(10): 944-52. 
76. 
Albon J, Karwatowski WS, Easty DL, Sims TJ, Duance VC. Age related changes in the 
non-collagenous components of the extracellular matrix of the human lamina cribrosa. Br 
J Ophthalmol, 2000; 84(3): 311-7. 
77. 
Masseguin C, Mani-Ponset L, Herbute S, Tixier-Vidal A, Gabrion J. Persistence of tight 
junctions and changes in apical structures and protein expression in choroid plexus 
epithelium of rats after short-term head-down tilt. J Neurocytol, 2001; 30(5): 365-77. 
78. 
Fechtner RD, Weinreb RN. Mechanisms of optic nerve damage in primary open angle 
glaucoma. Surv Ophthalmol, 1994; 39(1): 23-42. 
79. 
Yablonski ME, Asamoto A. Hypothesis concerning the pathophysiology of optic nerve 
damage in open angle glaucoma. J Glaucoma, 1993; 2(2): 119-27. 
80. 
Yan DB, Coloma FM, Metheetrairut A, Trope GE, Heathcote JG, Ethier CR. 
Deformation of the lamina cribrosa by elevated intraocular pressure. Br J Ophthalmol, 
1994; 78(8): 643-8. 
81. 
Ren R, Jonas JB, Tian G, Zhen Y, Ma K, Li S, Wang H, Li B, Zhang X, Wang N. 
Cerebrospinal fluid pressure in glaucoma: a prospective study. Ophthalmology, 2010; 
117(2): 259-66. 
82. 
Morgan WH, Yu DY, Cooper RL, Alder VA, Cringle SJ, Constable IJ. The influence of 
cerebrospinal fluid pressure on the lamina cribrosa tissue pressure gradient. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 1995; 36(6): 1163-72. 
83. 
Kupersmith MJ, Sibony P, Mandel G, Durbin M, Kardon RH. Optical coherence 
tomography of the swollen optic nerve head: deformation of the peripapillary retinal 
pigment epithelium layer in papilledema. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 2011; 52(9): 6558-
64. 
84. 
Arbeille P, Shoemaker K, Kerbeci P, Schneider S, Hargens A, Hughson R. Aortic, 
cerebral and lower limb arterial and venous response to orthostatic stress after a 60-day 
bedrest. Eur J Appl Physiol, 2011. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
93 
 
85. 
Herault S, Fomina G, Alferova I, Kotovskaya A, Poliakov V, Arbeille P. Cardiac, arterial 
and venous adaptation to weightlessness during 6-month MIR spaceflights with and 
without thigh cuffs (bracelets). Eur J Appl Physiol, 2000; 81(5): 384-90. 
86. 
Thornton WE, Hoffler GW, Rummel JA, Anthropometric changes and fluid shifts, in 
Biomedical Results from Skylab1977; NASA: Washington D.C. 
87. 
Moore TP, Thornton WE. Space shuttle inflight and postflight fluid shifts measured by 
leg volume changes. Aviat Space Environ Med, 1987; 58(9 Pt 2): A91-6. 
88. 
Arborelius M, Jr., Balldin UI, Lila B, Lundgren CE. Regional lung function in man 
during immersion with the head above water. Aerosp Med, 1972; 43(7): 701-7. 
89. 
Montgomery LD. Body volume changes during simulated weightlessness: an overview. 
Aviat Space Environ Med, 1987; 58(9 Pt 2): A80-5. 
90. 
Lathers CM, Charles JB, Elton KF, Holt TA, Mukai C, Bennett BS, Bungo MW. Acute 
hemodynamic responses to weightlessness in humans. J Clin Pharmacol, 1989; 29(7): 
615-27. 
91. 
Liu J, Verheyden B, Beckers F, Aubert AE. Haemodynamic adaptation during sudden 
gravity transitions. Eur J Appl Physiol, 2011. 
92. 
Norsk P, Damgaard M, Petersen L, Gybel M, Pump B, Gabrielsen A, Christensen NJ. 
Vasorelaxation in space. Hypertension, 2006; 47(1): 69-73. 
93. 
Leach CS, Alfrey CP, Suki WN, Leonard JI, Rambaut PC, Inners LD, Smith SM, Lane 
HW, Krauhs JM. Regulation of body fluid compartments during short-term spaceflight. J 
Appl Physiol, 1996; 81(1): 105-16. 
94. 
Rowell LB, Human cardiovascular control.1993: Oxford University Press. 
95. 
Kas'ian, II, Talavrinov VA, Luk'ianchikov VI, Kobzev EA. [Effect of antiorthostatic 
hypokinesia and space flight factors on changes in crural volume]. Kosm Biol Aviakosm 
Med, 1980; 14(4): 51-5. 
96. 
Kirsch KA, Baartz FJ, Gunga HC, Rocker L. Fluid shifts into and out of superficial 
tissues under microgravity and terrestrial conditions. Clin Investig, 1993; 71(9): 687-9. 
97. 
Thornton WE, Linder BJ, Moore TP, Pool SL. Gastrointestinal motility in space motion 
sickness. Aviat Space Environ Med, 1987; 58(9 Pt 2): A16-21. 
98. 
Leach H, Lewis M, Luscombe DK, Nicholls PJ. Studies of plasma levels and the 
excretion of beclamide in normal human subjects [proceedings]. Br J Clin Pharmacol, 
1975; 2(4): 377P-378P. 
99. 
Hoffler GW JR, Apollo flight crew cardiovascular evaluations, in Biomedical results of 
Apollo, 1975; Scientific and Technical Information Office, National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. 
100. 
Hoffler GW BS, Nicgossian AE, In-flight lower limb volume measurements, in The 
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project: Medical Report, 1977; Scientific and Technical Information 
Office, National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 63-9. 
101. 
Buckey JC, Jr., Lane LD, Levine BD, Watenpaugh DE, Wright SJ, Moore WE, Gaffney 
FA, Blomqvist CG. Orthostatic intolerance after spaceflight. J Appl Physiol, 1996; 81(1): 
7-18. 
102. 
Waters WW, Ziegler MG, Meck JV. Postspaceflight orthostatic hypotension occurs 
mostly in women and is predicted by low vascular resistance. J Appl Physiol, 2002; 
92(2): 586-94. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
94 
 
103. 
Johnson P DT, LeBlanc A., Blood volume changes, in Biomedical results from Skylab, 
1977; Scientific and Technical Information Office, National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 
104. 
Alfrey CP, Udden MM, Leach-Huntoon C, Driscoll T, Pickett MH. Control of red blood 
cell mass in spaceflight. J Appl Physiol, 1996; 81(1): 98-104. 
105. 
Udden MM, Driscoll TB, Pickett MH, Leach-Huntoon CS, Alfrey CP. Decreased 
production of red blood cells in human subjects exposed to microgravity. J Lab Clin Med, 
1995; 125(4): 442-9. 
106. 
Leach CS, Inners LD, Charles JB. Changes in total body water during spaceflight. J Clin 
Pharmacol, 1991; 31(10): 1001-6. 
107. 
Drummer C, Heer M, Dressendorfer RA, Strasburger CJ, Gerzer R. Reduced natriuresis 
during weightlessness. Clin Investig, 1993; 71(9): 678-86. 
108. 
Norsk P. Cardiovascular and fluid volume control in humans in space. Curr Pharm 
Biotechnol, 2005; 6(4): 325-30. 
109. 
Norsk P. Renal adjustments to microgravity. Pflugers Arch, 2000; 441(2-3 Suppl): R62-
5. 
110. 
Norsk P, Foldager N, Bonde-Petersen F, Elmann-Larsen B, Johansen TS. Central venous 
pressure in humans during short periods of weightlessness. J Appl Physiol, 1987; 63(6): 
2433-7. 
111. 
Foldager N, Andersen TA, Jessen FB, Ellegaard P, Stadeager C, Videbaek R, Norsk P. 
Central venous pressure in humans during microgravity. J Appl Physiol, 1996; 81(1): 
408-12. 
112. 
Kirsch KA, Rocker L, Gauer OH, Krause R, Leach C, Wicke HJ, Landry R. Venous 
pressure in man during weightlessness. Science, 1984; 225(4658): 218-9. 
113. 
Buckey JC, Gaffney FA, Lane LD, Levine BD, Watenpaugh DE, Blomqvist CG. Central 
venous pressure in space. N Engl J Med, 1993; 328(25): 1853-4. 
114. 
Buckey JC, Jr., Gaffney FA, Lane LD, Levine BD, Watenpaugh DE, Wright SJ, Yancy 
CW, Jr., Meyer DM, Blomqvist CG. Central venous pressure in space. J Appl Physiol, 
1996; 81(1): 19-25. 
115. 
Arbeille P, Fomina G, Roumy J, Alferova I, Tobal N, Herault S. Adaptation of the left 
heart, cerebral and femoral arteries, and jugular and femoral veins during short- and long-
term head-down tilt and spaceflights. Eur J Appl Physiol, 2001; 86(2): 157-68. 
116. 
Videbaek R, Norsk P. Atrial distension in humans during microgravity induced by 
parabolic flights. J Appl Physiol, 1997; 83(6): 1862-6. 
117. 
White RJ, Blomqvist CG. Central venous pressure and cardiac function during 
spaceflight. J Appl Physiol, 1998; 85(2): 738-46. 
118. 
Prisk GK, Guy HJ, Elliott AR, Deutschman RA, 3rd, West JB. Pulmonary diffusing 
capacity, capillary blood volume, and cardiac output during sustained microgravity. J 
Appl Physiol, 1993; 75(1): 15-26. 
119. 
Diridollou S, Pavy-Le Traon A, Maillet A, Bellossi F, Black D, Patat F, Lagarde JM, 
Berson M, Gall Y. Characterisation of gravity-induced facial skin edema using 
biophysical measurement techniques. Skin Res Technol, 2000; 6(3): 118-27. 
120. 
Linnarsson D, Tedner B, Eiken O. Effects of gravity on the fluid balance and distribution 
in man. Physiologist, 1985; 28(6 Suppl): S28-9. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
95 
 
121. 
Hsieh ST, Ballard RE, Murthy G, Hargens AR, Convertino VA. Plasma colloid osmotic 
pressure increases in humans during simulated microgravity. Aviat Space Environ Med, 
1998; 69(1): 23-6. 
122. 
Parazynski SE, Hargens AR, Tucker B, Aratow M, Styf J, Crenshaw A. Transcapillary 
fluid shifts in tissues of the head and neck during and after simulated microgravity. J 
Appl Physiol, 1991; 71(6): 2469-75. 
123. 
Hargens AR. Fluid shifts in vascular and extravascular spaces during and after simulated 
weightlessness. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 1983; 15(5): 421-7. 
124. 
Hargens AR, Watenpaugh DE. Cardiovascular adaptation to spaceflight. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc, 1996; 28(8): 977-82. 
125. 
Lakin WD, Stevens SA, Penar PL. Modeling intracranial pressures in microgravity: the 
influence of the blood-brain barrier. Aviat Space Environ Med, 2007; 78(10): 932-6. 
126. 
Christ F, Gamble J, Baranov V, Kotov A, Chouker A, Thiel M, Gartside IB, Moser CM, 
Abicht J, Messmer K. Changes in microvascular fluid filtration capacity during 120 days 
of 6 degrees head-down tilt. J Appl Physiol, 2001; 91(6): 2517-22. 
127. 
Diedrich A, Paranjape SY, Robertson D. Plasma and blood volume in space. Am J Med 
Sci, 2007; 334(1): 80-5. 
128. 
Berry CA. The medical legacy of Gemini. Life Sci Space Res, 1968; 6: 1-19. 
129. 
Baisch F, Beck L, Blomqvist G, Wolfram G, Drescher J, Rome JL, Drummer C. 
Cardiovascular response to lower body negative pressure stimulation before, during, and 
after space flight. Eur J Clin Invest, 2000; 30(12): 1055-65. 
130. 
Blomqvist CG, Buckey JC, Gaffney FA, Lane LD, Levine BD, Watenpaugh DE. 
Mechanisms of post-flight orthostatic intolerance. J Gravit Physiol, 1994; 1(1): P122-4. 
131. 
Fritsch-Yelle JM, Whitson PA, Bondar RL, Brown TE. Subnormal norepinephrine 
release relates to presyncope in astronauts after spaceflight. J Appl Physiol, 1996; 81(5): 
2134-41. 
132. 
Watenpaugh DE, Buckey JC, Lane LD, Gaffney FA, Levine BD, Moore WE, Wright SJ, 
Blomqvist CG. Effects of spaceflight on human calf hemodynamics. J Appl Physiol, 
2001; 90(4): 1552-8. 
133. 
Bleeker MW, De Groot PC, Pawelczyk JA, Hopman MT, Levine BD. Effects of 18 days 
of bed rest on leg and arm venous properties. J Appl Physiol, 2004; 96(3): 840-7. 
134. 
Buckey JC, Lane LD, Plath G, Gaffney FA, Baisch F, Blomqvist CG. Effects of head 
down tilt for 10 days on the compliance of the lower limb. Physiologist, 1990; 33(1 
Suppl): S167-8. 
135. 
Buckey JC, Lane LD, Plath G, Gaffney FA, Baisch F, Blomqvist CG. Effects of head-
down tilt for 10 days on the compliance of the leg. Acta Physiol Scand Suppl, 1992; 604: 
53-9. 
136. 
Convertino VA, Doerr DF, Stein SL. Changes in size and compliance of the calf after 30 
days of simulated microgravity. J Appl Physiol, 1989; 66(3): 1509-12. 
137. 
Tuday EC, Meck JV, Nyhan D, Shoukas AA, Berkowitz DE. Microgravity-induced 
changes in aortic stiffness and their role in orthostatic intolerance. J Appl Physiol, 2007; 
102(3): 853-8. 
138. 
Waters WW, Platts SH, Mitchell BM, Whitson PA, Meck JV. Plasma volume restoration 
with salt tablets and water after bed rest prevents orthostatic hypotension and changes in 
supine hemodynamic and endocrine variables. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, 2005; 
288(2): H839-47. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
96 
 
139. 
Convertino VA. G-factor as a tool in basic research: mechanisms of orthostatic tolerance. 
J Gravit Physiol, 1999; 6(1): P73-6. 
140. 
Fu Q, Witkowski S, Levine BD. Vasoconstrictor reserve and sympathetic neural control 
of orthostasis. Circulation, 2004; 110(18): 2931-7. 
141. 
Bonnin P, Ben Driss A, Benessiano J, Maillet A, Pavy le Traon A, Levy BI. Enhanced 
flow-dependent vasodilatation after bed rest, a possible mechanism for orthostatic 
intolerance in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol, 2001; 85(5): 420-6. 
142. 
Lee SM, Moore AD, Jr., Fritsch-Yelle JM, Greenisen MC, Schneider SM. Inflight 
exercise affects stand test responses after space flight. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 1999; 
31(12): 1755-62. 
143. 
Preston DL, Shimizu Y, Pierce DA, Suyama A, Mabuchi K. Studies of mortality of 
atomic bomb survivors. Report 13: Solid cancer and noncancer disease mortality: 1950-
1997. Radiat Res, 2003; 160(4): 381-407. 
144. 
Ivanov VK, Gorski AI, Maksioutov MA, Tsyb AF, Souchkevitch GN. Mortality among 
the Chernobyl emergency workers: estimation of radiation risks (preliminary analysis). 
Health Phys, 2001; 81(5): 514-21. 
145. 
Kolesnick R, Fuks Z. Radiation and ceramide-induced apoptosis. Oncogene, 2003; 
22(37): 5897-906. 
146. 
Menendez JC, Casanova D, Amado JA, Salas E, Garcia-Unzueta MT, Fernandez F, de la 
Lastra LP, Berrazueta JR. Effects of radiation on endothelial function. Int J Radiat Oncol 
Biol Phys, 1998; 41(4): 905-13. 
147. 
Tishkin SM, Rekalov VV, Ivanova IV, MoreLand RS, Soloviev AI. Ionizing non-fatal 
whole-body irradiation inhibits Ca2+-dependent K+ channels in endothelial cells of rat 
coronary artery: possible contribution to depression of endothelium-dependent vascular 
relaxation. Int J Radiat Biol, 2007; 83(3): 161-9. 
148. 
Bourlier V, Diserbo M, Joyeux M, Ribuot C, Multon E, Gourmelon P, Verdetti J. Early 
effects of acute gamma-radiation on vascular arterial tone. Br J Pharmacol, 1998; 123(6): 
1168-72. 
149. 
Simone NL, Soule BP, Ly D, Saleh AD, Savage JE, Degraff W, Cook J, Harris CC, Gius 
D, Mitchell JB. Ionizing radiation-induced oxidative stress alters miRNA expression. 
PLoS One, 2009; 4(7): e6377. 
150. 
Soloviev AI, Tishkin SM, Parshikov AV, Ivanova IV, Goncharov EV, Gurney AM. 
Mechanisms of endothelial dysfunction after ionized radiation: selective impairment of 
the nitric oxide component of endothelium-dependent vasodilation. Br J Pharmacol, 
2003; 138(5): 837-44. 
151. 
Soucy KG, Lim HK, Benjo A, Santhanam L, Ryoo S, Shoukas AA, Vazquez ME, 
Berkowitz DE. Single exposure gamma-irradiation amplifies xanthine oxidase activity 
and induces endothelial dysfunction in rat aorta. Radiat Environ Biophys, 2007; 46(2): 
179-86. 
152. 
Suvorava T, Luksha L, Bulanova KY, Lobanok LM. Dose-rate dependent effects of 
ionizing radiation on vascular reactivity. Radiat Prot Dosimetry, 2006; 122(1-4): 543-5. 
153. 
Soucy KG KJ, Bugaj L, Ryoo S, Vandegaer KM, Nyhan D, et al., Xanthine oxidase 
inhibition attenuates vascular endothelial dysfunction in irradiated rats., in NASA Human 
Research Program Investigator Workshop 2009: League City, Texas. 
154. 
Hodes PJ, Perryman CR, Chamberlain RH. Cerebral angiography. Am J Roentgenol 
Radium Ther, 1947; 58(5): 543-83. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
97 
 
155. 
Wellens DL, Wouters LJ, De Reese RJ, Beirnaert P, Reneman RS. The cerebral blood 
distribution in dogs and cats. An anatomical and functional study. Brain Res, 1975; 86(3): 
429-38. 
156. 
Kawai Y, Murthy G, Watenpaugh DE, Breit GA, Deroshia CW, Hargens AR. Cerebral 
blood flow velocity in humans exposed to 24 h of head-down tilt. J Appl Physiol, 1993; 
74(6): 3046-51. 
157. 
Bassett DR, Jr., Howley ET, Lightfoot TJ. Hemodynamic responses to exercise in blacks 
and whites. J Appl Physiol, 1993; 75(4): 1920-2. 
158. 
Iwasaki K, Levine BD, Zhang R, Zuckerman JH, Pawelczyk JA, Diedrich A, Ertl AC, 
Cox JF, Cooke WH, Giller CA, Ray CA, Lane LD, Buckey JC, Jr., Baisch FJ, Eckberg 
DL, Robertson D, Biaggioni I, Blomqvist CG. Human cerebral autoregulation before, 
during and after spaceflight. J Physiol, 2007; 579(Pt 3): 799-810. 
159. 
Greaves DK, Arbeille P, Hughson RL. WISE 2005: altered cerebrovascular 
autoregulation after 60 day head-down bed rest. J Gravit Physiol, 2007; 14(1): P61-2. 
160. 
Jeong SM, Shibata S, Levine BD, Zhang R. Exercise plus volume loading prevents 
orthostatic intolerance but not reduction in cerebral blood flow velocity after bed rest. 
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, 2012; 302(2): H489-97. 
161. 
Geary GG, Krause DN, Purdy RE, Duckles SP. Simulated microgravity increases 
myogenic tone in rat cerebral arteries. J Appl Physiol, 1998; 85(5): 1615-21. 
162. 
Wilkerson MK, Colleran PN, Delp MD. Acute and chronic head-down tail suspension 
diminishes cerebral perfusion in rats. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, 2002; 282(1): 
H328-34. 
163. 
Wilkerson MK, Lesniewski LA, Golding EM, Bryan RM, Jr., Amin A, Wilson E, Delp 
MD. Simulated microgravity enhances cerebral artery vasoconstriction and vascular 
resistance through endothelial nitric oxide mechanism. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, 
2005; 288(4): H1652-61. 
164. 
Stevens SA, Lakin WD, Penar PL. Modeling steady-state intracranial pressures in supine, 
head-down tilt and microgravity conditions. Aviat Space Environ Med, 2005; 76(4): 329-
38. 
165. 
Califano JC, Uribe A, Chang JL, Becker CL, Napier JJ, Kishore V, Zhou D, Love G, 
Gernhardt K, Tolle JC. Concept and synthetic approach for a kilogram scale synthesis of 
octa-D-arginine amide nonahydrochloride salt. Adv Exp Med Biol, 2009; 611: 205-6. 
166. 
Clapham R, O'Sullivan E, Weller RO, Carare RO. Cervical lymph nodes are found in 
direct relationship with the internal carotid artery: significance for the lymphatic drainage 
of the brain. Clin Anat, 2010; 23(1): 43-7. 
167. 
Weller RO, Djuanda E, Yow HY, Carare RO. Lymphatic drainage of the brain and the 
pathophysiology of neurological disease. Acta Neuropathol, 2009; 117(1): 1-14. 
168. 
Cserr HF, Harling-Berg CJ, Knopf PM. Drainage of brain extracellular fluid into blood 
and deep cervical lymph and its immunological significance. Brain Pathol, 1992; 2(4): 
269-76. 
169. 
Knopf PM, Cserr HF, Nolan SC, Wu TY, Harling-Berg CJ. Physiology and immunology 
of lymphatic drainage of interstitial and cerebrospinal fluid from the brain. Neuropathol 
Appl Neurobiol, 1995; 21(3): 175-80. 
170. 
Kim M, Johnston MG, Gupta N, Moore S, Yucel YH. A model to measure lymphatic 
drainage from the eye. Exp Eye Res, 2011. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
98 
 
171. 
Gashev AA, Delp MD, Zawieja DC. Inhibition of active lymph pump by simulated 
microgravity in rats. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, 2006; 290(6): H2295-308. 
172. 
Zhang LF. Vascular adaptation to microgravity: what have we learned? J Appl Physiol, 
2001; 91(6): 2415-30. 
173. 
Platts SH, Martin DS, Stenger MB, Perez SA, Ribeiro LC, Summers R, Meck JV. 
Cardiovascular adaptations to long-duration head-down bed rest. Aviat Space Environ 
Med, 2009; 80(5 Suppl): A29-36. 
174. 
Friedman DI. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Curr Pain Headache Rep, 2007; 11(1): 
62-8. 
175. 
Mokri B. The Monro-Kellie hypothesis: applications in CSF volume depletion. 
Neurology, 2001; 56(12): 1746-8. 
176. 
Hargens AR, Richardson S. Cardiovascular adaptations, fluid shifts, and countermeasures 
related to space flight. Respir Physiol Neurobiol, 2009; 169 Suppl 1: S30-3. 
177. 
Rowell LB, Blackmon JR. Venomotor responses during central and local hypoxia. Am J 
Physiol, 1988; 255(4 Pt 2): H760-4. 
178. 
Chapman PH, Cosman ER, Arnold MA. The relationship between ventricular fluid 
pressure and body position in normal subjects and subjects with shunts: a telemetric 
study. Neurosurgery, 1990; 26(2): 181-9. 
179. 
Hirvonen EA, Nuutinen LS, Kauko M. Hemodynamic changes due to Trendelenburg 
positioning and pneumoperitoneum during laparoscopic hysterectomy. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand, 1995; 39(7): 949-55. 
180. 
Gisolf J, van Lieshout JJ, van Heusden K, Pott F, Stok WJ, Karemaker JM. Human 
cerebral venous outflow pathway depends on posture and central venous pressure. J 
Physiol, 2004; 560(Pt 1): 317-27. 
181. 
Gotoh TM, Fujiki N, Matsuda T, Gao S, Morita H. Roles of baroreflex and 
vestibulosympathetic reflex in controlling arterial blood pressure during gravitational 
stress in conscious rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 2004; 286(1): R25-30. 
182. 
Gotoh TM, Tanaka K, Fujiki N, Matsuda T, Gao S, Morita H. Cerebral hemodynamics 
during microgravity. Biol Sci Space, 2003; 17(3): 204-5. 
183. 
Wilson MH, Newman S, Imray CH. The cerebral effects of ascent to high altitudes. 
Lancet Neurol, 2009; 8(2): 175-91. 
184. 
Koh L, Zakharov A, Johnston M. Integration of the subarachnoid space and lymphatics: 
is it time to embrace a new concept of cerebrospinal fluid absorption? Cerebrospinal 
Fluid Res, 2005; 2. 
185. 
Wiener TC. Space obstructive syndrome: intracranial hypertension, intraocular pressure, 
and papilledema in space. Aviat Space Environ Med, 2012; 83(1): 64-6. 
186. 
Brazis PW, Lee AG. Elevated intracranial pressure and pseudotumor cerebri. Curr Opin 
Ophthalmol, 1998; 9(6): 27-32. 
187. 
Maralani PJ, Hassanlou M, Torres C, Chakraborty S, Kingstone M, Patel V, Zackon D, 
Bussiere M. Accuracy of brain imaging in the diagnosis of idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension. Clin Radiol, 2012. 
188. 
Rohr A, Dorner L, Stingele R, Buhl R, Alfke K, Jansen O. Reversibility of venous sinus 
obstruction in idiopathic intracranial hypertension. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol, 2007; 28(4): 
656-9. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
99 
 
189. 
Johanson CE, Duncan JA, 3rd, Klinge PM, Brinker T, Stopa EG, Silverberg GD. 
Multiplicity of cerebrospinal fluid functions: New challenges in health and disease. 
Cerebrospinal Fluid Res, 2008; 5: 10. 
190. 
Redzic ZB, Segal MB. The structure of the choroid plexus and the physiology of the 
choroid plexus epithelium. Adv Drug Deliv Rev, 2004; 56(12): 1695-716. 
191. 
Brown PD, Davies SL, Speake T, Millar ID. Molecular mechanisms of cerebrospinal 
fluid production. Neuroscience, 2004; 129(4): 957-70. 
192. 
Jaggi GP, Harlev M, Ziegler U, Dotan S, Miller NR, Killer HE. Cerebrospinal fluid 
segregation optic neuropathy: an experimental model and a hypothesis. Br J Ophthalmol, 
2010; 94(8): 1088-93. 
193. 
Johnston M. The importance of lymphatics in cerebrospinal fluid transport. Lymphat Res 
Biol, 2003; 1(1): 41-4; discussion 45. 
194. 
Killer HE, Jaggi GP, Flammer J, Miller NR, Huber AR, Mironov A. Cerebrospinal fluid 
dynamics between the intracranial and the subarachnoid space of the optic nerve. Is it 
always bidirectional? Brain, 2007; 130(Pt 2): 514-20. 
195. 
Killer HE, Laeng HR, Groscurth P. Lymphatic capillaries in the meninges of the human 
optic nerve. J Neuroophthalmol, 1999; 19(4): 222-8. 
196. 
Silver I, Kim C, Mollanji R, Johnston M. Cerebrospinal fluid outflow resistance in sheep: 
impact of blocking cerebrospinal fluid transport through the cribriform plate. 
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol, 2002; 28(1): 67-74. 
197. 
Andersson N, Malm J, Eklund A. Dependency of cerebrospinal fluid outflow resistance 
on intracranial pressure. J Neurosurg, 2008; 109(5): 918-22. 
198. 
Eklund A, Smielewski P, Chambers I, Alperin N, Malm J, Czosnyka M, Marmarou A. 
Assessment of cerebrospinal fluid outflow resistance. Med Biol Eng Comput, 2007; 
45(8): 719-35. 
199. 
Ruchoux MM, Rosati C, Gelot A, Lhuintre Y, Garay R. Ultrastructural study of the 
choroid plexus of spontaneously hypertensive rats. Am J Hypertens, 1992; 5(11): 851-6. 
200. 
Alperin NJ, Lee SH, Loth F, Raksin PB, Lichtor T. MR-Intracranial pressure (ICP): a 
method to measure intracranial elastance and pressure noninvasively by means of MR 
imaging: baboon and human study. Radiology, 2000; 217(3): 877-85. 
201. 
James JT, Meyers VE, Sipes W, Scully RR, Matty CM, Crew Health and Performance 
Improvements with Reduced Carbon Dioxide Levels and the Resources Impact to 
Accomplish Those Reductions, in 41st International Conference on Environmental 
Systems, 2011:; AIAA: Portland, Oregon.  
202. 
Tomassoni D, Bramanti V, Amenta F. Expression of aquaporins 1 and 4 in the brain of 
spontaneously hypertensive rats. Brain Res, 2010; 1325: 155-63. 
203. 
Gabrion J, Herbute S, Oliver J, Maurel D, Davet J, Clavel B, Gharib C, Fareh J, Fagette 
S, Nguyen B. Choroidal responses in microgravity. (SLS-1, SLS-2 and hindlimb-
suspension experiments). Acta Astronaut, 1995; 36(8-12): 439-48. 
204. 
Martins AN, Doyle TF, Newby N. PCO(2) and rate of formation of cerebrospinal fluid in 
the monkey. Am J Physiol, 1976; 231(1): 127-31. 
205. 
Edsbagge M, Tisell M, Jacobsson L, Wikkelso C. Spinal CSF absorption in healthy 
individuals. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 2004; 287(6): R1450-5. 
206. 
Geeraerts T, Newcombe VF, Coles JP, Abate MG, Perkes IE, Hutchinson PJ, Outtrim JG, 
Chatfield DA, Menon DK. Use of T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the optic 
nerve sheath to detect raised intracranial pressure. Crit Care, 2008; 12(5): R114. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
100 
 
207. 
Helmke K, Hansen HC. Fundamentals of transorbital sonographic evaluation of optic 
nerve sheath expansion under intracranial hypertension II. Patient study. Pediatr Radiol, 
1996; 26(10): 706-10. 
208. 
Helmke K, Hansen HC. Fundamentals of transorbital sonographic evaluation of optic 
nerve sheath expansion under intracranial hypertension. I. Experimental study. Pediatr 
Radiol, 1996; 26(10): 701-5. 
209. 
Blaivas M. Bedside emergency department ultrasonography in the evaluation of ocular 
pathology. Acad Emerg Med, 2000; 7(8): 947-50. 
210. 
Blaivas M, Theodoro D, Sierzenski PR. A study of bedside ocular ultrasonography in the 
emergency department. Acad Emerg Med, 2002; 9(8): 791-9. 
211. 
Tsung JW, Blaivas M, Cooper A, Levick NR. A rapid noninvasive method of detecting 
elevated intracranial pressure using bedside ocular ultrasound: application to 3 cases of 
head trauma in the pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care, 2005; 21(2): 94-
8. 
212. 
Galetta S, Byrne SF, Smith JL. Echographic correlation of optic nerve sheath size and 
cerebrospinal fluid pressure. J Clin Neuroophthalmol, 1989; 9(2): 79-82. 
213. 
James JT, The headache of carbon dioxide exposures, 2007; Society of Automotive 
Engineers. 07ICES-42. 
214. 
Bacal K, Beck G, Barratt MR, Hypoxia, hybercarbia, and atmospheric control, in 
Principles of clinical medicine for space flight, M.R. Barratt and S.L. Pool, Editors. 2008; 
Springer Sciences+business Media: New York. 459. 
215. 
Wong KL, Carbon dioxide, in Spacecraft maximum allowable concentrations for selected 
airborne contaminants, N.R. Council, Editor 1996; National Academy Press: 
Washington, DC. 105-188. 
216. 
Williams WJ, Physiological responses to oxygen and carbon dioxide in the breathing 
environment, 2009; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health Public Meeting 
slides: Pittsburgh, PA. 
217. 
Ainslie PN, Duffin J. Integration of cerebrovascular CO2 reactivity and chemoreflex 
control of breathing: mechanisms of regulation, measurement, and interpretation. Am J 
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 2009; 296(5): 1473-95. 
218. 
Carbon dioxide as a fire suppressant: examining the risks. 2000; Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
219. 
Son CH, Zapata JL, Lin CH, Investigation of airflow and accumulation of carbon dioxide 
in the Service Module crew quarters. 2002; Society of Automotive Engineers. 2002-01-
2341. 
220. 
International Space Station Program Mission Integration and Operations Control Board 
(MIOCB). Interim report meeting minutes, 9 July 2009, Houston, TX. 2009: http://iss-
www.jsc.nasa.gov/nwo/ppco/cbp_miocb/bbt_docs/bbtcal/Minutes.6.09-Jul-2009.htm. 
221. 
Felker P, Assessment of crew reports on ISS carbon dioxide symptoms, in Internal 
Report, 2003. 
222. 
Smith SMZ, S. R.; Kloeris, V; Heer M., Nutritional biochemistry of spaceflight.2009; 
New York: Nova Science Publishers. 
223. 
Junqueira LF, Jr. Teaching cardiac autonomic function dynamics employing the Valsalva 
(Valsalva-Weber) maneuver. Adv Physiol Educ, 2008; 32(1): 100-6. 
224. 
Edwards MR, Martin DH, Hughson RL. Cerebral hemodynamics and resistance exercise. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc, 2002; 34(7): 1207-11. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
101 
 
225. 
Dickerman RD, McConathy WJ, Smith GH, East JW, Rudder L. Middle cerebral artery 
blood flow velocity in elite power athletes during maximal weight-lifting. Neurol Res, 
2000; 22(4): 337-40. 
226. 
Haykowsky MJ, Eves ND, DE RW, Findlay MJ. Resistance exercise, the Valsalva 
maneuver, and cerebrovascular transmural pressure. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 2003; 35(1): 
65-8. 
227. 
Lempert P, Cooper KH, Culver JF, Tredici TJ. The effect of exercise on intraocular 
pressure. Am J Ophthalmol, 1967; 63(6): 1673-6. 
228. 
Movaffaghy A, Chamot SR, Petrig BL, Riva CE. Blood flow in the human optic nerve 
head during isometric exercise. Exp Eye Res, 1998; 67(5): 561-8. 
229. 
Vieira GM, Oliveira HB, de Andrade DT, Bottaro M, Ritch R. Intraocular pressure 
variation during weight lifting. Arch Ophthalmol, 2006; 124(9): 1251-4. 
230. 
Dickerman RD, Smith GH, Langham-Roof L, McConathy WJ, East JW, Smith AB. Intra-
ocular pressure changes during maximal isometric contraction: does this reflect intra-
cranial pressure or retinal venous pressure? Neurol Res, 1999; 21(3): 243-6. 
231. 
Marcus DF, Edelhauser HF, Maksud MG, Wiley RL. Effects of a sustained muscular 
contraction on human intraocular pressure. Clin Sci Mol Med, 1974; 47(3): 249-57. 
232. 
Avunduk AM, Yilmaz B, Sahin N, Kapicioglu Z, Dayanir V. The comparison of 
intraocular pressure reductions after isometric and isokinetic exercises in normal 
individuals. Ophthalmologica, 1999; 213(5): 290-4. 
233. 
Chromiak JA, Abadie BR, Braswell RA, Koh YS, Chilek DR. Resistance training 
exercises acutely reduce intraocular pressure in physically active men and women. J 
Strength Cond Res, 2003; 17(4): 715-20. 
234. 
Brimioulle S, Moraine JJ, Norrenberg D, Kahn RJ. Effects of positioning and exercise on 
intracranial pressure in a neurosurgical intensive care unit. Phys Ther, 1997; 77(12): 
1682-9. 
235. 
Kashimada A, Machida K, Honda N, Mamiya T, Takahashi T, Kamano T, Osada H. 
Measurement of cerebral blood flow with two-dimensional cine phase-contrast mR 
imaging: evaluation of normal subjects and patients with vertigo. Radiat Med, 1995; 
13(2): 95-102. 
236. 
Delp MD, Armstrong RB, Godfrey DA, Laughlin MH, Ross CD, Wilkerson MK. 
Exercise increases blood flow to locomotor, vestibular, cardiorespiratory and visual 
regions of the brain in miniature swine. J Physiol, 2001; 533(Pt 3): 849-59. 
237. 
Jorgensen LG, Perko G, Secher NH. Regional cerebral artery mean flow velocity and 
blood flow during dynamic exercise in humans. J Appl Physiol, 1992; 73(5): 1825-30. 
238. 
Jorgensen LG, Perko M, Hanel B, Schroeder TV, Secher NH. Middle cerebral artery flow 
velocity and blood flow during exercise and muscle ischemia in humans. J Appl Physiol, 
1992; 72(3): 1123-32. 
239. 
Hellstrom G, Fischer-Colbrie W, Wahlgren NG, Jogestrand T. Carotid artery blood flow 
and middle cerebral artery blood flow velocity during physical exercise. J Appl Physiol, 
1996; 81(1): 413-8. 
240. 
Moraine JJ, Lamotte M, Berre J, Niset G, Leduc A, Naeije R. Relationship of middle 
cerebral artery blood flow velocity to intensity during dynamic exercise in normal 
subjects. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol, 1993; 67(1): 35-8. 
241. 
Harris A, Malinovsky V, Martin B. Correlates of acute exercise-induced ocular 
hypotension. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci, 1994; 35(11): 3852-7. 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
102 
 
242. 
Qureshi IA, Xi XR, Huang YB, Wu XD. Magnitude of decrease in intraocular pressure 
depends upon intensity of exercise. Korean J Ophthalmol, 1996; 10(2): 109-15. 
243. 
Qureshi IA. The effects of mild, moderate, and severe exercise on intraocular pressure in 
glaucoma patients. Jpn J Physiol, 1995; 45(4): 561-9. 
244. 
Passo MS, Goldberg L, Elliot DL, Van Buskirk EM. Exercise training reduces intraocular 
pressure among subjects suspected of having glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol, 1991; 109(8): 
1096-8. 
245. 
Smith SM, Heer M, Wang Z, Huntoon CL, Zwart SR. Long-duration space flight and bed 
rest effects on testosterone and other steroids. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 2012; 97(1): 270-
8. 
246. 
Zwart SR, Gibson CR, Mader TH, Ericson K, Ploutz-Snyder R, Heer M, Smith SM. 
Vision changes after spaceflight are related to alterations in folate- and vitamin B-12-
dependent one-carbon metabolism. J Nutr, 2012; 142(3): 427-31. 
247. 
Frisen L. Swelling of the optic nerve head: a staging scheme. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry, 1982; 45(1): 13-8. 
248. 
Nixon JV, Murray RG, Bryant C, Johnson RL, Jr., Mitchell JH, Holland OB, Gomez-
Sanchez C, Vergne-Marini P, Blomqvist CG. Early cardiovascular adaptation to 
simulated zero gravity. J Appl Physiol, 1979; 46(3): 541-8. 
249. 
Keil LC, McKeever KH, Skidmore MG, Hines J, Severs WB. The effect of head-down 
tilt and water immersion on intracranial pressure in nonhuman primates. Aviat Space 
Environ Med, 1992; 63(3): 181-5. 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
103 
 
X. 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A: Previous and Expanded In-flight Medical Requirements Testing for 
Crewmembers (MEDB 1.10) 
Pre- and Postflight 
 
Imaging: 
• 
2D Ultrasound 
– 
L-12/9 months and L-6/3 months 
– 
R+1/3 days 
• 
MRI  
– 
L-21/18 months 
– 
R+1/3 days 
– 
3Tesla or better 
 
Ocular Exam: 
• 
Vision exam 
• 
Fundoscopy  
• 
Tonometry  
• 
OCT 
 
In-flight L+30 Days & R-30 Days 
• 
Vision Examination(includes L+100 days) 
• 
Fundoscopy  
• 
Tonometry  
• 
2D Ultrasound 
 
 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
104 
 
Appendix B: Additional Central Nervous System Work/Topic Areas that will be 
Incorporated into the Evidence Base 
 Intracranial Pressure 
• 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) formation, outflow resistance and superior saggital sinus pressure 
• 
Cerebrovascular resistance changes in microgravity 
• 
Changes in cerebral perfusion pressure in microgravity 
• 
Normotensive versus hypertensive mean arterial pressure (MAP) and the impact on ICP 
• 
Loss of hydrostatic drainage in zero gravity (venous congestion) 
• 
Cerebral venous drainage in zero gravity (internal jugular drainage) 
• 
Hypertension and increased CSF formation: 
– 
Increased choroidal plexus blood flow 
– 
Elevated CSF secretion 
– 
Elevated CSF pressure 
– 
Increased expression of Aquaporin 1 (AQP1) in hypertensive animals 
 
Effects of CO2 on cerebrovascular dilation and ICP 
 CSF Production 
 
Aquaporin 1 and 4 production 
 
Down regulation of AQP1 in rats exposed to G
 
 
AQP1 knockout mice have 25% reduction in CSF production 
 
Hydrocephalic rats demonstrate a significant down regulation of AQP1 expression in the choroid 
plexus  
 
Up regulation of AQP1 in rats upon exposure to 1 G after 0-G exposure 
 
Changes upon return to 1-G a mechanism for continued elevated ICP 
 
Role of increased ANP in-flight and decreased CSF production 
 
Elevated ICP and CSF production postflight in an ISS astronaut 
 CSF Absorption: 
 
Inflammatory cytokines, signaling molecules  
 
Arachnoid villi – defects in absorption (for example, subarachnoid hemorrhage – scarring) 
 
Elevated ICP and inflammatory damage to the arachnoid membrane 
 
Venous lymphatics – elongation stretching neural and vascular structures  
 
Impaired cranial lymphatic drainage with cephalad-fluid shift 
 
 Interparenchymal interstitial fluid accumulation  
 
Risk of onset normal pressure hydrocephalus, or spontaneous CSF leak: does prolonged elevated 
pressure within the CSF space precipitate a spontaneous rupture and CSF leak  
 CSF Biomarkers: 
 
Myelin basic protein 
 
oligo-clonal bands  
 
Q albumin 
 
IGF –a neurotrophic factor 
 
IGG index 
 
Somatostatin-an inhibitory neuroendocrine hormone 
 
Markers of inflammation (cytokines and inflammatory markers) 
 
Markers of CSF production (ANP or BNP, vasopressin, aquaporin ) 
 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
105 
 
Appendix C: Acronyms 
ANP 
Atrial natriuretic peptide 
AQP1 
Aquaporin1 
BM 
Basement membrane 
BNP 
Brain natriuretic peptide 
CBF 
Cerebral blood flow 
CDM 
Carbon dioxide monitor 
cm H2O 
Centimeters of water 
CM 
Countermeasure 
CNS 
Central nervous system 
CO2 
Carbon dioxide 
CO 
Carbon monoxide 
CPG 
Clinical Practice Guideline 
CRP 
C-reactive protein 
CRV 
Central retinal vein 
CSF 
Cerebrospinal fluid 
CSFp 
Cerebrospinal fluid pressure 
CT 
Computer tomography 
CVP 
Central venous pressure 
CVST 
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis 
D 
Diopters 
EP 
Esophageal pressure 
EVA 
Extravehicular activity 
ExMC 
Exploration Medical Capability Group 
G 
Gravity 
H2O 
Water 
HDT 
Head-down tilt 
HRP 
Human Research Program 
ICP 
Intracranial pressure 
IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
IIH 
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension 
IOP 
Intraocular pressure 
IRCO2 
Infrared carbon dioxide sensor 
ISS 
International Space Station 
L 
Liter 
LC 
Lamina cribosa 
LSAH 
Lifetime Surveillance of Astronaut Health 
MAP 
Mean arterial pressure 
L 
Microliter 
MCA 
Middle cerebral artery 
Risk of Microgravity-Induced Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure (ICP) 
 
106 
 
mm 
Millimeters 
mm Hg 
Millimeters of mercury 
MR 
Medical Requirement 
MRA 
Magnetic resonance angiography 
MRI 
Magnetic resonance imaging 
MRIDs 
Medical Requirements Integration Documents 
MRV 
Magnetic resonance venogram 
NASA  
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
NSAID 
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
NFL 
Nerve fiber layer 
NIRS 
Near-infrared spectroscopy 
O2 
Oxygen 
OCT 
Optical coherence tomography 
OD 
Right eye 
ONH 
Optic nerve head 
ONSD 
Optic nerve sheath diameter 
OS 
Left eye 
OU 
Both eyes 
PMC 
Private medical conference 
POAG 
Primary open angle glaucoma 
ppCO2 
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide 
PRA 
Probabilistic risk assessment 
RCAP 
Research Clinical Advisory Panel 
RNFL 
Retinal nerve fiber layer 
RPE 
Retinal pigment epithelium 
SAS 
Subarachnoid space 
SDTO 
Supplemental detailed test objective 
SLS 
Spacelab Life Sciences 
SLSD 
Space Life Sciences Directorate 
SMO 
Supplimental Medical Objective 
SOV 
Superior ophthalmic vein 
SRP 
Standing Review Panel 
STS 
Shuttle Transportation System 
TCD 
Transcranial Doppler 
TLP 
Translaminar pressure 
TSNIT 
Temporal, superior, nasal, inferior, to temporal 
TeTTA 
Tet-transactivator 
VIIP 
 
Visual Impairment/Intracranial Pressure 
